RED STAR 
OVER-' 
CHINA 

by 

EDGAR SNOW 



NEW YORK 




RED STAR OVER CHINA 


THE MO DERJV LIBRART 

1 

OF THE world’s BEST BOOKS 

The publishers will hepleased4o send, ttpon request, an - 
illuSlrated folder setting Jorlh the purpose and scope of 
THE MODERN LIBKAUY, and listing each volume 
in the series. Every reader of boohs will find titles he 
has been seeking, handsomely printed, in unabridged 
editions, and at an unusually low price. 



SLOW TRAIN TO “WESTERN PEACE” II 

the inoculations available. A microbe’s-eye view of my 
blood-stream would have revealed a macabre cavalcade, 
with my arms and legs shot with smallpox, typhoid, cholera, 
typhus and plague germs. All five diseases are prevalent in 
the North-west. Moreover, alarming reports had lately told 
of the spread of bubonic plague in Shensi province, one of 
the few spots on earth where it is endemic. 

My immediate destination was Sianfu — ^^vhich means 
W^estern Peace. Sianfu is the capital of Shensi province, it is 
two tiresome days and nights by train to the south-west of 
Peking, and it is the western terminus of the Lunghai rail- 
way. From there I planned to go northward and enter the 
Soviet districts, which occupied the very heart of Ta Hsi- 
pei — China’s Great North-west. Lochuan, a town about one 
hundred fifty miles north of Sianfu, then marked the be- 
ginning of Red territory in Shensi. Everything north of it, 
excepting strips of territory along the main highways, and 
some points which will be noted later, was .already dyed 
Red. With Lochuan roughly the southern, and the Great 
Wall the northern, extremities of the Red control in Shensi, 
both the eastern and western Red frontiers were formed by 
the Yellow River. Coming down from the fringes of Tibet, 
the wide muddy stream flows northward through Kansu 
and Ninghsia, and above the Great Wall into the province 
of Suiyuan — Inner Mongolia. Then after many miles of 
uncertain wandering towards the east it turns southward 
again, to pierce the Great Wall and form the boundary be- 
tween the provinces of Shensi and Shansi. 

It was within this great bend of China’s most treacherous 
river that the Soviets then operated — in northern Shensi, 
north-eastern Kansu, and south-eastern Ninghsia. And by 
a strange sequence of history this region almost corresponds 
to the original confines of the birthplace of China. Near here 
the Chinese first formed and unified themselves as a people, 
thousands of years ago. 




ON WAR WITH JAPAN 9 1 

candles sputtered on the square, unpainted table before us, 
spread with a clean red-felt cloth. Mrs. Mao was in an ad- 
joining room making compote from udld peaches pur- 
chased that day from a fruit merchant. Mao sat tvith his 
legs crossed, in a deep shelf hewn from the solid rock, and 
smoked a Chien Men cigarette. 

Seated next to me was Wu Liang-p’ing, a young Soviet 
“functionary” \t'ho acted as interpreter in my “formal” in- 
terviews with Mao Tse-tung. I wrote dovm in full in Eng- 
lish Mao Tse-tung’s answers to my questions, and these 
were then translated into Chinese and corrected by Mao, 
who is noted for his insistence upon accuracy of detail. 
With the assistance of Mr. Wu, the interviews were re- 
translated into English, and because of such precautions I 
believe these pages to contain few errors of reporting, 

Wu Liang-p’ing, to whom I am indebted for much as- 
sistance in gathering material, is the son of a rich landlord 
in Fenghua, Chiang Kai-shek’s native district in Chekiang. 
He fled from there some years ago when his father, appar- 
ently an ambitious burgher, wished to betroth him to a rela- 
tive of the Generalissimo. Wu is a graduate of Ta Hsia Uni- 
versity, in Shanghai — v'here Pat Givens once arrested him 
and had him sentenced to two years in the Ward Road jail. 
He had studied in France, England and Russia, was twenty- 
six years old, and for his energetic labours as a Communist 
received his uniform, room and food — the latter consisting 
chiefly of millet and noodles. 

Mao began to ansu’^er my first question, about Commu- 
nist policy towards Japan, which was this: “If Japan is de- 
feated and driven from China, do you think that the major 
problem of ‘foreign imperialism’ will in general have been 
solved here?” 

“Yes. If other imperialist countries do not act as Japan, 
and if China defeats Japan, it will mean that the Chinese 
masses have awakened, have mobilized, and have established 



THE SOVIET MOVEMENT 1 67 

which later became known as the Autumn Crop Uprising-. 
My programme there called for the realization of five 
points: (i) complete severance of the Provincial Party from 
the Kuomintang, ( 2 ) organization of a peasant- worker revo- 
lutionary army, (3) confiscation of the property of small 
and middle, as well as great, landlords, (4) setting up the 
power of the Communist Party in Hunan, independent of 
the Kuomintang, and (5) organization of Soviets. The fifth 
point at that time was opposed by the Comintern, and not 
till later did it advance it as a slogan. 

“In September we had already succeeded in organizing 
a widespread uprising, through the peasant unions of Hu- 
nan, and the first units of a peasant-v'orker army were 
formed. Recruits were drawn from three principal sources 
— the peasantry itself, the Hanyang miners, and the insur- 
rectionist troops of the Kuomintang. This early military 
force of the revolution tvas called the ‘First Division of the 
First Peasants’ and W orkers’ Army.’ The first regiment was 
formed from the Hanyang miners. A second was created 
among the peasant guards in P’ing ICiang, Liu Yang, Li Ling 
and nvo other bsien of Hunan, and a third from part of the 
garrison forces of Wuhan, which had revolted against Wang 
Ching-wei. This army was organized with the sanction of 
the Flunan Provincial Committee, but the general pro- 
gramme of the Hunan Committee and of our army was 
opposed by the Central Committee of the Party, which 
seemed, however, to have adopted a policy of wait-and-see 
rather than of active opposition, 

“MTile I was organizing the army and travelling be- 
tween the Hanyang miners and the peasant guards, I v^as 
captured by some viin-fuav, vmrldng vdth the Kuomintang. 
The Kuomintang terror was then at its height and hundreds 
of suspected Reds were being shot. I was ordered to be 
talccn to the jnm-fmvi Iicadquarters, where I was to be 
killed. Borrowing several tens of- dollars from a comrade, 



Copyright, /p5i?, 1944, by Random House, Inc. 



Random House IS THE PUBLISHER OF 
THE MODERN LIBRARY 


pruNETT A. crrr - donald s. KLorrrR • RonrRT k. haas 

M>nuf3c:i::cJ in Uie Uniiei! States of America 
Printed by Parkn-a)- Prinrinc Company Bound tty H. Wolff 


l-jl GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

frontier of Kiangsi, adjacent to Fukien, in the winter of 
1927, arid out of this later developed a powerful Soviet base. 
After the failure of the Canton Uprising, P’eng Pai had led 
part of the loyal troops to Hailofeng, and there formed a 
Soviet, which, following a policy of putschism, was soon 
destroyed. Part of the army, however, emerged from the 
district under the command of Ku Ta-chen, and made con- 
nections with Chu Teh and myself, later on becoming the 
nucleus of the i ith Red Army. 

“In the spring of 1928, partisans became active in 
Hsingku and Tungku in Kiangsi, led by Li Wen-lung and 
Li Sao-chu. This movement had its base around Kian, and 
these partisans later became the core of the Third Army, 
while the district itself became the base of the Central So- 
viet Government. In Western Fukien Soviets were estab- 
lished by Chang Ting-chen, Teng Tzu-hui (later killed), 
and Hu Pei-teh, who afterwards became a Social-Demo- 
crat. 

“During the ‘struggle v. adventurism’ period at Ching- 
kanshan, the First Army had defeated two attempts by 
White troops to retake the mountain. Chingkanshan proved 
to be an excellent base for a mobile army such as we were 
building. It had good natural defences, and grew enough 
crops to supply a small army. It had a circuit of 500 li and 
was about 80 li in diameter. Locally it was known other- 
wise, as Ta Hsiao Wu Chin (the real Chingkanshan being 
a nearby mountain, long deserted), and got its name from 
five main wells on its sides — ta, hsiao, shaiig, hsia, and 
chung, or big, small, upper, lower, and middle wells. The 
five villages on the mountain were named after these wells. 

“After the forces of our army combined at Chingkan- 
shan there was a reorganization, the famous Fourth Red 
Army was created, and Chu Teh was made commander, 
while I became political commissar. More troops arrived 
.at Chingkanshan, after uprisings and mutinies in Ho Chien’s 



^A{ 



LIFE OF THE RED WARRIOR 305 

roots. They hated the Whites for burning their homes and 
stealing their food. Even before we arrived they had fought 
the landlords and tax-collectors, so they welcomed us. Many 
joined us, and nearly all helped us in some way. They 
wanted us to win! And because of that we fought on and 

broke through the blockade.” 

He turned to me and ended simply. ‘ Tactics are impor- 
tant, but we could not exist if the majority of the people did 
not support us. We are nothing but the fist of the people 
beating their oppressors!” 




5 

Life of the Red Warrior 



T he Chinese soldier has had a poor reputation abroad. 

Many people think his gun is chiefly ornamental, that 
he does his only fighting with an opium-pipe, that any rifle 
shots exchanged are by mutual agreement and in the an, 
that battles are fought with silver and the soldier is paid in 
opium. Some of this was true enough of most armies in the 
past, but the v/ell-equipped first-class Chinese soldier of to- 
day (White as well as -Red) is no longer a vaudeville joke, 
as the world will certainly be shown when Japan finally be- 
gins her all-out attempt to conquer China. 

There are still plenty of comic-opera armies in China, 
but in recent years there has arisen a new type of Chinese 
warrior, who will soon supplant the old. Civil war, especially 
the class war between Reds and Whites, has been very 
costly, and at times heavily and bitterly fought, with no 




“little red devils” 369 

won’t make a mistake in my name. It would give a bad im- 
pression to the foreign comrades if they thought a Red sol- 
dier was named Chi-pa!” Until then I had had no notion of 
introducing Chi-pang into this strange book, but with 'that 
remark I had no choice in the matter, and he walked into it 
right beside the Generalissimo, the dignity of history not- 
withstanding. 

• One of the duties of the Young Vanguards in the Soviets 
was to examine travellers on roads behind the front, and see 
that they had their road passes. They executed this duty 
quite determinedly, and marched anvone without his papers 
to the local Soviet for examination. P’eng Teh-huai told me 
of being stopped once and being asked for his lu-fiao by 
some Young Vanguards, who threatened to arrest him. 

“But I am P’eng Teh-huai,” he, said. “I write those passes 
myself.” 

“•We don’t care if you are Commander Chu Teh.” said 
the young sceptics; “you must have a road pass.” They sig- 
nalled for assistance, and several boys came running from 
the fields to reinforce them. 

P’eng had to write out his lu-fiao and sign it himself be- 
fore they allowed him to proceed. 

Altogether, as you may have gathered, the “little devils” 
were one thing in Red China with Avhich it was hard to find 
anything seriously wrong. Their spirit was superb. I suspect 
that more than once an older man, looking at them, forgot 
his pessimism and was heartened to think that he was fight- 
ing for the future of lads like those. They were invariably 
cheerful and optimistic, and they had a ready ^‘’haof’ for 
every how-are-you, regardless of the weariness of the day’s 
march. They were patient, hard-working, bright, and eager 
to learn, and seeing them made you feel that China was not 
hopeless, that no nation was more hopeless than its youth. 
Here in the Vanguards was the future of China, if only this 
youth could be freed, shaped, made aware, and given a role 



PREFACE 


J: 

S EVEN years have passed since I wrote this book, and no 
sabbatical period in history has produced events of such 
importance nor has so greatly enlarged the arena in the 
struggle for human liberation. It seemed a formidable as- 
signment to me when the publishers of the Modern Library 
first proposed that I revise the text and bring it up to date; 
but I agreed to try. After carefully reading the book again, 
however, I decided it wa5 impracticable to attempt a com- 
prehensive re-writing, for t^vo reasons. 

First, in spite of the catastrophe that has swept over 
China and throughout the world since 1937, this volume 
contains little material which should be _eliminated as his- 
torically obsolete. The surprising thing is that so many of 
its essential facts and interpretations and observations still 
faithfully reveal the springs of strength and the validity of 
the Chinese re^mlutionary movement. It is a strange fact 
that even today no one can say that the pattern of life for 
which the men and women in this book have fought, and 
for which many of them have died, may not eventually 
prevail over all China. 

f Secondly, Red Star Over China happens, more by acci- 
1 dent than design, to cover a period of history which, it is 
now clearer than ever, was of such a turning-point char- 
acter that it unquestionably shaped the destiny of China 
for at least a generation to come. To attempt to weave into 
this account of a particular epoch and its moods the extra- 
neous facts of more recent events would be to rob the 
original of such integrity as it possesses. And inevitably it 



UNITED FRONT IN ACTION 377 

rades, coming here to Kansu and Ninghsia, felt discouraged 
because the contrast was so great compared with the re- 
sponse we received there. They felt depressed because of 
the poverty of the country here and the low level of politi- 
cal enthusiasm among the people. Don’t be discouraged! 
Work harder! These people are also brothers, and will re- 
spond to the same treatment as other human beings. We 
must not miss a single opportunity to convince a White sol- 
dier or a Mohammedan peasant. We are not working hard 
enough. 

“As for the masses, we must urge them to take the lead 
in every revolutionary action. We must not touch any Mo- 
hammedan landlord ourselves, but we must show the people 
clearly that they have the freedom to do so, that we will 
protect their mass organizations that do so, that this is their 
revolutionary right, that it is the product of their labour and 
belongs to them. We must intensify our efforts to raise the 
political consciousness of the masses. Remember that they 
have heretofore had no political consciousness e.Kcept racial 
hatred. We must awaken a patriodc consciousness in them. 
We must deepen our work in the Ke Lao Hui and other 
secret societies and make them active, not merely passive, 
allies on the anti-Japanese front. We must consolidate our 
good relations with the ahims and urge them to take places 
of leadership in the anti-Japanese movement. We must 
strengthen the basis of revolutionary’' power by organizing 
every Mohammedan youth.” 

P’eng’s statement Avas followed by long critical com- 
ments from the political commissars of the First and the 15th 
Army Corps. Both of them reviewed their efforts in “United 
Front educational work” and suggested improvements. All 
commanders took copious notes, and afterwards there was a 
session of long debate and argument which lasted till dinner. 
P’eng moved that the two army corps be enlarged by five 



via 


PREFACE 


would give you an inadequate and only a somewhat con- 
fusing notion of the correlation of nvo periods of history. 

So I have kept the original text untouched, except for 
minor deletions and changes in tense here and there, and 
instead I have brought the book up to 1944 by the addition 
of a brief chapter of summary in an epilogue. This new 
material is written against my background of work in China 
as a war correspondent from 1937 to 1941, when I visited 
many corners of the country and made a second trip to the 
now enlarged districts controlled by the Cliinese Commu- 
nists. After the Pearl Harbor attack I became an accredited 
U. S. Army correspondent and, in this capacity, I again 
visited China in 1942 and 1943 and I talked to Communist 
as well as Kuomintang leaders. 

Red Star Over China astonished me by the interest it 
aroused all over the \vorld. I knew it was no literary master- 
piece and, when I wrote it, I thought that it would find a 
relatively small audience abroad. The main thing I hoped 
\\'as that it M'ould prove a useful book to many Chinese, 
who had not had the opportunity to meet these country- 
men of tlicins, ^\'hich a combination of circumstances had 
ejiven to me. I was surprised that the book became so popu- 
lar in Britain and America and that hundreds of people 
there .said that it offered them an entirely new conception 
of Chinese character. This was probably becau.se it appeared 
just at the time M’hcn China’s unexpectedly adamant re- 
sistance to Japan \vas astounding the world. Red Star Over 
China seemed to e.xplain that “phenomenon” to many 
people. 

Translations of the book appeared in various languagc.s, 
including japanc.se, Hindi, Mongolian and Kazakh. Several 
pirated editions were publLshcd in China and among the 
tens of thou.sands of copies of the Chinese translation printed 
there were editions produced cntirelv in guerrilla territory. 
.As far as I know, this is the only foreign book written aI)out 



EPILOGUE, 1944 5'3 

Men in our Army and State Department began to see 
that M'e could apply a similar test in China, with the change 
of only one word in the above text; that was, for Germans 
read Japanese. They thought that as long as we did not, the 
combat efficiency of China’s armies would be minimized and 
we should remain cut off from millions of useful allies. 

Another thing which we had to keep in mind was that 
Japan might yet ccupy all Southern and Western Cliina. 
That she had the means to do so was hardly to be questioned. 
Japan had lost positions and equipment to us, but very little 
of the reserves of manpower and materiel she had been ac- 
cumulating for many years. Except for our air force in 
China, tve did not as yet have any combat troops to throw 
against her. And no one who knew the true condition of 
Chiang Kai-shek’s armies suggested that they would be able 
to defeat a large-scale Japanese offensive. 

It would be entirely within the logic of Japan’s past strat- 
egy to seek securit)>- by extending her flank in China, once 
Americans showed signs of building up bases there from 
which her “inner zone” in the northern provinces and Man- 
churia and in Japan itself could be invaded. The Hankow- 
Canton Railway, the railways of Kwangsi and Yunnan, and 
the roads of Fukien, IGangsi and Kwangtung, would all be 
useful continental arteries of supply for the maintenance of 
Japanese troops in southeast Asia, as Japan’s shipping situa- 
tion grew extremely acute. It was quite conceivable Japan 
would consider the occupation of South China worth the 
cost— and it might not be relatively high— for two other 
reasons: i) loot, raw materials and food; 2) to prevent our 
setting up a base around Hongkong and Canton, in co- 
operation with a Chinese attack from the west. 

If such a campaign developed on a major scale, the bulk 
of the Generalissimo’s forces would probably retire to M est- 
ern Yunnan and Szechuan, and his government might as- 
sume the character of a regime-in-exile. The Communist 



PREFACE 


China wliich might be said to have had a considerable in^ 
fluencc on the political thinking of the present generation 
of Chinese youth. 

In India I found that Red Star had been used by many 
students as a source of ideas for the mobilization of Indian 
youth against fascism and imperialism. I met a young 
Thaldn who said that in Burma the Thaldn guerrillas had 
only this book as a guide for the organization of the vil- 
lages for partisan warfare. A Malayan told me it was serving 
a similar purpose for Chinese-led guerrillas in Malaya. In 
Russia I talked to three girls tvho belonged to a guerrilla 
detachment composed of high-school jmuths fighting the 
Nazis outside Smolensk. In the beginning none of them had 
had any military experience and I asked how they had 
''i learned to fight. “We got some ideas from a book called 
i Red Star Over Chhia,” they said — not knowing who I was. 

I do not flatter myself that I had much to do with im- 
parting to this volume such lessons of international applica- 
tion as have been drawn from it. You will see that it is 
mostly the work of a scribe and that for many pages I 
simply wrote down what I ,was told by the brave men and 
women with whom it was my privilege to live and for a 
time to identify myself. If there is any personal credit to be 
claimed by me, it is simply in the fact that I had sense 
enough to let them tell their own story, I still think it is a 
magnificent story. And the sequel to it is now being enacted 
with tears and blood between the mountains and rivers of 
China, where our own American warriors will yet fight 
as liberators of conquered soil. 

Edgar Snow 


Madison, Connecticut, May, 



INBEX 


522 

Lintung, 441, 443; siege of, 222 
“Little Red Devils.” See Young 
Vanguards 

Liu, Miss Ch’iin-hsien, 273 
Liu En-kung, 174 
Liu Hsiang, General, 203 
Liu Hsiao, 312-14 
Liu Lung-huo, 35-7 
Liu Pei-ch’eng, Commander, 202- 
3 

Liu Ti-tsao, 182 

Liu Ting Chiao (Bridge Fixed by 
Liu), 205 -9 

Liu Tzu-tan, Commander, career, 
219-25; leader of Peasant Up- 
rising, 1929, 220; head of 
min-t’mn at Pao An, 220; 
outlawed, 221; occupation of 
Shensi, 1932, 221; with 15th 
Red Army Corps, 223; dis- 
missal, reinstatement, death, 
223-5 

Liu Wen-hui, General, 203 
Liukochiao Incident, 492, 497 
Lo An, storming of, 185 
Lo Chang-lung, 157 
Lo Chai-lung, 150 
Lo Cho-ying, General, 403 
Lo Fu, 80, 109, 401, 422, 427 
Lo Man, 146, 158 
Lo Ping-hui, Commander, 177 
Lo Ting-yi, 401, 427 
Lo Yi-ming, labour leader, 53 
Lochuan, ii, 30-1, 428 
Loess, 13, 30 

Lololand, independent, 202-3 
Lolos, alliance with Reds, 202-3; 
in First Front Army, 282; in 
party school, 474 
'Lon^ March, 189-218, 514; sta- 
tistics of, 215-16; propaganda 
value of, 217 

Loyang, headquarters of Chiang 
Kai-shek, 435 

Lu Hsun, 154 note, 405, 474 
Lu Jen-ching, 157 
Lu Ti-p’ing, General, 183, 295 


Lu Tsung-wai, 160 
Lung Yeh, Soviet established, 173 
Lung Yun, Governor, 198 
Lunghai railway, 11-13 

A4 a, the five, 342 
Ada Chun, 147 note 
Ma Hung-kuei, General, 325, 339, 
344-8, 349-5L 359; ammuni- 
tion captured by Reds, 283; 
cavalry blockaded, 325; Jap- 
anese support of, 346 
Ma Hung-ping, General, 340, 
359; troops disarmed, 223 
Ma Pu-ching, 340 
Ada Pu-fang, 340 
Adalaj^a, 93 
Adanchukuo, 41, 85 
Adanchuria, 20-3, 85-6, 96, 100, 
315, 3*7, 43i-42i 499, 512; 
anti-Japanese volunteers in, 
98. See also Tungpei Army, 
Chang Hsueh-liang 
Adanchurian Army. See Tungpei 
Army 

Adanchus and Manchu (Ch’ing) 
dynasty, overthrow of, 135- 
9, 380, 480 

Adantzu opposition to Red and 
White Chinese, 213-14 
Adao Jen-Sheng, 123 
Adao Tse-hung, i8o 
Mao Tse-ming, 268, 387 
Adao Tse-tan, 180 
Adao Tse-tung, Chairman, 5, 9, 
50, 69-101, 109, 210, 212-14, 
252, 387-8, 476, 497-8; be- 
comes a Adarxist, 155; organ- 
izer Hunan Uprising, 167; 
captured by viin-thian, 167; 
positions in Soviets, 73-4; 
childhood, 121-34; in Chang- 
sha, 134-48, 152; education,, 
134-44; in Peking, 149; in 
Shanghai, 151, 161-2; in na- 
tionalist revolution, 156-63; 
on Li Lisan, 178, 180-2; at the 




INDEX 

Tam River, 205; dissensions 
with Chang Kuo-t’ao, 212- 
13; disagreements with Ch’en 
Tu-hsiu, 161-5; in Shensi, 

224; on co-operation with 
the Kuomintang, 96-7, 423-6; 
joins Chu Teh, 170; biogra- 
phy, 121-88; habits of work, 

77-9; on- tactics in anti-Japa- 
-nese war, gorioi; marriage, 

156; on Japanese imperial- 
ism, 87-90; on the Long 
March, 72, 79, 218; in Can- 
ton, 160; interest, in philoso- 
phy, 77-8 

Maoerhkai area. Reds and Fourth 
Front Army, 212; Southern, 
armies resting, 212 
Marriage Law of the Chinese 
Soviet Republic, The, 242 
Marx, and Marxism, 4-5, 155-^. 

157, 232, 296, 313, .35i> 364. 
404-6 

May 30th Incident, 160 
Miaos, 202; in First Front Army, 

282 

Min Li Pao,'i^5 
Alin Pao, 144 

Min-fmii, 40-2, 167-8, 177, 220, 

231, 237. 302> 319-20, 397-9 
Missionaries, 14, 15, 62, 72, 395-7 
Mohammedans. See Moslems 
Molcung, rest at, on Long March, 

212 

Alongolia, Inner, 96, 160, 491, 504; 
Outer, Republic of, 16, 95, 

284, 340, 347, 472; Commu- 
nist policy towards, 95-6 
Mongols, 41, 69, 216, 268, 342, 

432, 474 

Moslems, Chinese, and Moslem- 
ism, 297, 339-55, 37i, 393, 473; 
troops disarmed, 223; white 
armies of, 346-7, 373-5; c^v- 
. aln,^ of, 214, 359; family of 
Ma, 342; origins in China, 
339-43; taxation of, 345-6; 


523 

and Chinese Red Army, 
347-8; Red Army of, 282, 
348, 353-4, 374-8; Soviets of, 
347-54; See also Ma Hung- 
ku’ei, Ma Hung-ping 

Nan Hsiang, Battle, 185 
Nanchang Uprising, 54, 57, 103, 
166, 171, 385 

Nanking, Nanking government, 
Nanking Armies, 7, 8, 19-20, 
72, 83, 85, 88, 139, 182-3, 185, 
J92, 197-9, 219, 282, 300, 312, 
323, 333-4, 340, 359, 399, 498; 
League of Nations adviser, 
228; and Sian incident and 
rapprochement with Reds, 
448-52, 456-63, 465-71, 475-8; 
aided by foreign powers, 
415-16, 450; coup d’etat, 4, 
82, 220; massacre of, 163; 
propaganda by, 323-4; helped 
by Soviet Russia, 412-13, 485; 
helped by imperialism, 483- 
5; handicapped bv imperial- 
ism, 485-6; and Communists, 
486-95. See also Kuomintanj. 
National Revolutionary Army^ 
385, 467, 475 

National Salvation Association, 
432, 436, 437 

Nationalist Expedidon, 220 _ 
Nationalist Party (and National- 
ists). See Kuomintang 
New China, 467 note 
New Conception of Society, A, 
296 

New Deal, 76 
New Hunan, 154 
New Life Movement, 312, 410 
New Masses, 479 
New Youth (Hsin Ch’ing Nien), 
147, 296 

Nieh Jung-chen, Commissar, 393 
Nineteenth Route Army, 417-19 
Ninghsia, 219, 277, 284, 339-48; 
ioesslands, 30; taxes in, 345- 



CONTENTS 


> 

Preface by the Author ptige vii 

Tart One 

IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

1. Some Unanswered Questions 3 

2. Slow Train to “Western Peace” 9 

3. Some Han Bronzes 17 

4. Through Red Gates 28 

Part T'wo 

THE ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

1. Chased by White-bandits 39 

2. The Insurrectionist 47 

3. Something about Ho Lung 56 

4. Red Companions 63 

Part Three 

IN “defended peace” 

1. Soviet Strong Man 69 

2. Basic Communist Policies So 

3. On War with Japan 90 

4. $2,000,000 in Heads 102 

5. Red Theatre 109 

Part Four 

genesis of a communist 

I. Childhood 12 1 



INDEX 


Po Ku, Chairman, 400, 401, 427, 
445 , 462 

Polidcal Defence Bureau, 43 
Political Science Clique (Chejig 
Hsiieh Hsi), 466 
Political Weekly, 160 
Poor People’s League, 34, 36, 39, 
40 

Press, suppression of news, 447-8 
Profiteers, and famine, 227 
Prohm, Rhena, 273 
“Proposal for the Convention of 
a Peace Conference,” 456 
note 

Red Academy (Hung-Chiin Ta- 
Hsueh), loi, 102-7, 385; sec- 
tions of, 106-T, name 
changed to “Anti-Japanese 
University,” 474 

Red Army (Part 8), 387-9, 498, 
501; personnel, 277-85; food 
and equipment, 283-4; paper 
shortage and propaganda, 
X02, 288-9; march through 
. Shansi, 10, 44; radio com- 
munications of, 49-50; Sec- 
ond Front Army, 61, 213, 
285, 423; beginnings, 166, 
167-70, 219; ist Division, 
4th Army, 172-4; 5th 
Army, 173; discipline, 176; 
3rd Army, 177; 32nd Red 
Army, 177; ist Army Corps, 
177, J79, 203, 210, 213, 215, 
224, 285, 423, 439; 1 2th Red 
X77; 5th Army Corps, 
185, 286; Red losses on Long 
March, and new tactics, 197, 
2io; crossing the Yangtze 
River, 197-200; at the Tam 
River, 201-9; crossing the 
mountains, 209-10, 215, 216; 

' seizure of money and food, 

21 1; bandit element elimi- 
nated, 222; 9th Army, 210; 
Fourth Front Army, "212-13, 


285, 330, 354 , 357 , 423; 15th 
Army Corps, 223, 324, 325, 
358; statistics on, 277-85; First 
Front 'Army, 179, 277, 282, 
285, 423; connects with 25th, 
26th, and 27th Red Armies, 
215; warriors, life of, 280-1, 
305-12; 19th Route Army, 
417; Medical Corps, 396; 20th 
Army, 182; and political edu- 
cation, 314; composition, 317- 
18; ist Cavalry Army, 359; 
25th Red Army, 222-3, 337-8; 
26th Red Army, 215, 222-3; 
27th Red Army, 215, 222-3; 
New Fourth Army, 499, 502, 
504, 509; Eighth Route Army, 
499 , 500, 502, 509; iSth 

Group Army, 499, 500, 506, 
508, 509, 514; 37th Group 
Army, 509; 38th Group 
Army, 509 

Red Army Academy, Moscotv, 
280 

Red Arsenal, 191 
Red Chhta, 73 note, 92 note, 266 
note, 481 note, 487 note 
Red China Daily News, 266, 310 
Red economic reforms, 232-41 
Red theatre, 109-19; at front, 290, 
378 

Report to the Comvmnist Party, 
488 

Rock, Dr. Joseph F., 62 note 
Roy, 165 

Russia, Soviet. See Soviet Union 

Salt, absence of in Red Districts, 
193; Red confiscation and 
distribution of on Lons 
March, 21 1 

San Aim Chu i (“People’s Tliref 
Principles”), 296, 476 
San Yuan, 446 

Sha Tou-yin, General, 332, 336 
Shan, 202 

Shang Chcfl-)^!, 138 



CONTEXTS 


xii 

2. Days in Changsha ' pnge 134 

3. Prelude to Revolution 148 

4. Tlie Nationalist Period 156 

5. The Soviet Movement 164 

6. Growth of the Red Army 175 

Part Five 

THE LONG MARCH 

1, The Fifth Campaign 189 

2. A Nation Emigrates 195 

3, The Heroes of Tatu 201 

4. Across the Great Grasslands 209 

Part Six 

RED STAR IN THE NORTH-WEST 

1. The Shensi Soviets: Beginnings 219 

2. Death and Taxes 225 

3. Soviet Society 232 

4. Anatomy of Money 243 

5. Life Begins at Fifty! 251 

Part Seven 

EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

1. Conversation with Red Peasants 259 

2. Soviet Industries 265 

3. “They Sing Too Much” 270 

Part Eight 

WITH THE RED ARMY 

1. The “Real” Red Army 277 

2. Impression of P'eng Teh-huai 285 

3. Wliy Is a Red- 290 

4. Tactics of Partisan Warfare 297 

5. Life of the Red M’arrior 305 

6. Session in Politics • 312 



CONTENTS 


xiii 

Part Nine 

WITH THE RED ARMY 


{Continued) 

1. Hsu Hai-tung, the Red Potter page 323 

2. Class War in China 331 

3. Four Great Horses 339 

' 4. Moslem and Alarxist 349 

Part Ten 

WAR AND PEACE 

1. A^ore about Horses 357 

2. “Little Red Devils” 362 

3. United Front in Action 370 

4. Concerning Chu Teh 379 

Part Eleven 

BACK TO PAO AN 

1. Casuals of the Road 393 

2. Life in Pao An 399 

3. The Russian Influence 404 

4. Chinese Communism and the Comintern 410 

5. That Foreign Brain-Trust 416 

6. Farewell to Red China . 422 

Part Twelve 

WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

1 . A Preface to Alutiny 43 r 

2. The Generalissimo Is Arrested 442 

3. Chiang, Chang and the Reds 452 

4. “Point Counter Point” 464 

5. Auld Lang Syne? 472 

6. Red Horizons 478 

Epilogue, 1944 497 

hidex 515 




RED STAR OVER CHINA 






PART ONE: IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

/ 

Sow.e Unanswered Questions 

■ 4 

D uring my seven years in China, hundreds of ques- 
tions had been asked about the Chinese Red Army, 
the Soviets, and the Communist movement. Eager partisans 
could supply you with a stock of ready answers, but these 
remained highly unsatisfactory. How did they know? They 
had never been to Red China. 

The fact was that there had been perhaps no greater 
mystery among nations, no more confused an epic, than the 
story of Red China. Fighting in the very heart of the most 
populous nation on earth, the Celestial Reds had for nine 
years been isolated by a news blockade as effective as a 
stone fortress. A mobile Great Wall of thousands of enemy 
troops constantly surrounded them; their territory was 
more inaccessible than Tibet. No one had voluntarily pene- 
trated that wall and returned to write of his experiences 
since the first Chinese Soviet was established at Tsalin in 
south-eastern Hunan, in November, 1927. 

Even the simplest points were disputed. Some people de- 
nied that there was such a thing as a Red Army. There were 
only thousands of hungry Jjrigands.^ Some denied even the 
existence of Soviets. They were an invention of Communist 
propaganda. Yet Red sympathizers extolled both as the only 
salvation for all the ills of China. In the midst of this propa- 
ganda and counter-propaganda, credible evidence was lack- 

3 



4 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

ing for dispassionnte observers seeking the truth. Here arc 
some of the unansv^ered questions that interested everyone 
concerned vdth politics and the quickening history of the 
Orient: 

Was or was not this Red Army of China a mass ol 
conscious Marxist revolutionaries, disciplined by and adhere 
ing to a centralized programme and a unified command un-. 
dcr the Chinese Communist Paity.^ If so, what was that 
programme? The Communists claimed to be fighting for 
agrarian revolution, and against imperialism, and for Soviet 
democracy and national emancipation. Nanking said that 
the Reds were only a new type of vandals and marauders led 
by “intellectual bandits.” Who Avas right? Or \vas cithci 
one? 

Before 1927, members of the Communist Party were ad- 
mitted to the Kuomintang, but in April of that year began 
the famous “purgation.” Communists, as well as unorgan- 
ized radical intellectuals, and thousands of organized work- 
ers and peasants, were executed on an extensive scale under 
Chiang Kai-shek, the leader of a Right coup d'’etat u'hich 
seized power at Nanking. Since then it had been a crime 
punishable by death to be a Communist or a Communist 
s\-mpathizer, and thousands had paid that penalty. Yet thou- 
sands more continued to run the risk. Thousands of peas- 
ants, workers, students and soldiers joined the Red Army 
in its struggle against the military dictatorship of the Nan- 
king regime. A^^hy? A^^iat inexorable force drove them on 
to support suicidal political opinions? What were the fun- 
damental (juarrels between the Kuomintang and the 
Kungch’antang?* 

'The Kunmintnntr, or^“Narionnl People’s Party,” founded by 
Dr. Sun Vat-sen and others, Itcld tlic hegemony of power in t!ie so- 
olled Nationalist Revolution, i924-i927-"Thc Kuntreh'antang. “Share 
Production Party,” or the Communist Party of Cliina, founded in 
ic):i, was the cltief ally of the Ivuomintanit during the Nationalist 
Revolution. 



- ^ SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 5 

What were the Chinese Communists like, any^vay? In 
what way did they resemble, in what way were they unlike. 
Communists or Socialists elsewhere? The tourist asked if 
they wore long beards, made noises with their soup, and 
carried home-made bombs in their brief-cases. The serious- 
minded wanted to know whether they were “genuine” 
Marxists. Did they read Capital and the works of Lenin? 
Had they a thoroughly Socialist economic programme? 
Were they Stalinites or Trotskyites? Or neither? Was their 
movement really an organic part of the World Revolution? 
Were they true internationalists? “Mere tools of Moscow,” 
or primarily nationalists struggling for an independent 
China? 

Who were these warriors who had fought so long, so 
fiercely, so courageously, and — as admitted by observers of 
every colour, and privately among Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek’s own follov'ers — on the whole so invincibly? 
What made them fight like that? What held them up? What 
was the revolutionary basis of their movement? What were 
the hopes and aims and dreams that had made of them the 
incredibly stubborn warriors — incredible compared with 
the history of compromise that is China! — ^^vho had endured 
hundreds of battles, blockade, salt-shortage, famine, disease, 
epidemic, and finally the historic Long March of 6,000 miles, 
in which they crossed twelve provinces of China, broke 
through thousands of Kuomintang troops, and triumphantly 
emerged at last into a new base in the North-west? 

Wlib were their leaders? Were they educated men with 
a fervent belief in an ideal, an ideology, and a doctrine? 
Social prophets, or mere ignorant peasants blindly fighting 
for an existence? What kind of man was Mao Tse-tung, 
No. I “Red-bandit” on Nanldng’s list, for whose capture, 
dead or alive, Chiang Kai-shek offered a reward of a quarter 
of a million silver dollars? What went on inside that highly 
priced Oriental head? Or was Mao really already dead, as 



6 TN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

Nanking officially announced? Wliac was Chu Teh like — 
this man called Coinmander-in-Chief of the Red Army, 
whose life had the same value to Nanking? What about Lin 
Piao, the tAvcnn’’-eight-year-old Red tactical genius whose 
famous First Red Army Corps was said to have never suf- 
fered a defeat? Where did he come fi'om? A^Hio were the 
many other Red leaders repeatedly reported dead, only to 
reappear in the news — unscathed and commanding new 
forces against the Kuomintang? 

What explained the Red Army’s remarkable record of 
resistance for nine years against vastly superior military 
combinations? Lacking a big industrial base, big cannon, 
gas, aeroplanes, money, and the modern technique which 
Nanking had utilized in its wars against them, how had 
these Reds survived, and increased their following? What 
militaiy tactics did they use? How were they instructed? 
'Who advised them? '\'Vere there some Russian military 
geniuses among them? Who led the outmanoeuvring, not 
only of all Kuomintang commanders sent against them, but 
also of Chiang Kai-shek’s large and expensive staff of foreign 
advisers, formerly headed by the late General Von Seeckt, 
chief of Hitler’s Reichsw^ehr? 

What v'as a Chinese Soviet like? Did the peasants sup- 
port it? If nor, what held it together? To what degree did 
the Reds cariA’^ out “Socialism” in districts where they had 
consolidated their power? AVhy hadn’t the Red Army taken 
i)ig cities? Did this prove that it wasn’t a genuine proletarian- 
led movement, but fundamentally remained a peasant re- 
bellion? Anyway, how was it possible to speak of “Com- 
munism” or “Socialism” in China, where over 8o per cent of 
tlic population V’as still agrarian, where industrialism was 
•Still in infant ganncnt.s — if not infantile paralysis? 

How did the Reds drc.ss? Fat? Play? Love? "Work? 
W’har were their marriage laws? Were women “nation- 
alized,” as Kuomintang publicists asserted? What was a 



SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 7 

Chinese “Red factory”? A Red Dramatic Society? How 
did they organize their economy? What about public health, 
recreation, education, “Red culture”? 

What was the strength of the Red Army? Half a mil- 
lion, as the Comintern publications boasted? If so, why 
didn’t it seize power? Where did it get arms and munitions? 
Was it a disciplined army? What about its morale? Was it 
true that officers and men lived alike? If, as Generalissimo 
Chiang announced in 1935, Nanking had “destroyed the 
.menace of Communist-banditry,” what explained the fact 
- that in 1937 the Reds occupied a bigger single unified ter- 
ritory (in China’s most strategic North-west) than ever be- 
fore? If the Reds were finished, why did Japan demand, as 
the famous Third Point of Hirota, that Nanking form an 
anti-Red pact with Tokyo and Nazi Germany “to prevent 
the boJshevization of Asia”? Were the Reds really “anti- 
imperialist”? Did they really want war with Japan? Would 
iVIoscow support them in such a war? Or were their fierce 
anti-Japanese slogans only a trick and a desperate attempt 
to win public sympathy, the last cry of demoralized traitors 
and. bandits, as the eminent Dr. Hu Shih nervously assured 
his excited students in Peiping? 

What are the military and political perspectives of the 
Chinese Communist movement? What is its historic de- 
velopment? Can it succeed? And just what would such suc- 
cess mean to us? To Japan? What would be the effect of 
this tremendous mutation upon a fifth mf the world’s in- 
habitants? What changes would it produce in world poli- 
tics? In world history? How would it affect the vast British, 
American and other foreign investment in China? Indeed, 
have the Reds any “foreign policy” at all? 

Finally, what was the meaning of the Communists’ offer 
to form a “National United Front” in China, and stop civil 
v^ar? 

■ For some time it had seemed ridiculous that not a single 



IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 


8 

non-Communist observer could answer those questions with 
confidence, accuracy, or facts based on personal investiga- 
tion. Here was a story, growing in interest and importance 
eveiy day; here was the story of China, as newspaper cor- 
respondents admitted to each other between dispatches sent 
out on trivial side-issues. Yet we were all woefully ignorant, 
about it. To get in touch with Communists in the “White” 
areas was extremely difficult. 

Communists, over whose heads hung the sentence of 
death, did not identify themselves as such in polite — or im- 
polite — ^society. Even in the foreign concessions, Nanking 
kept a well-paid espionage system at work. It included, for 
example, such vigilantes as C. Patrick Givens, former chief 
Red-chaser in the British police force of Shanghai’s Inter- 
national Settlement. Inspector Givens was each year cred- 
ited with the arrest — and subsequent imprisonment or exe- 
cution, after extradition from the settlement by the 
Kuomintang authorities — of scores of alleged Communists, 
the majority of them between the ages of fifteen and 
nventy-five. This famous fiatfoot’s services were recognized 
by Nanking in 1934, when he was awarded the Order of 
the Brilliant Jade, and generous gifts in cash. But he was 
only one of many foreign sleuths hired to spy upon young 
Chinese radicals and hunt them down in their own country. 

We all knew that the only way to learn anything about 
Red China was to go there. We excused ourselves by saying, 
''Mei yu fa-tzu ” — “It can’t be done.” A few had tried and 
failed. It was believed impossible. People thought that no- 
body could enter Red territor)i" and come out alive. Such 
u'^as the strength of years of anti-Communist propaganda in 
a counuy whose press is as rigidly censored and regimented 
as that of Italy or Germany. 

Tlien, in June, 1936, a close Chinese friend of mine 
brought me news of an amazing political situation in North- 
west China — a situation which was later to culminate in the 



SLOW TRAIN TO “WESTERN PEACE” 9 

sensational arrest of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and to 
change the current of Chinese history. More important to 
me then, how^ever, I learned with this news of a possible 
method of entry to Red territory. It necessitated leaving at 
once. The opportunity was unique and not to be missed. T 
decided to take it and attempt to break a news blockade 
nine years old. 

It is true there were risks involved, though the reports 
later published of my death — “killed by bandits” — ^were 
exaggerated. But, against a torrent of horror stories about 
Red atrocities that had for many years filled the subsidized 
vernacular and foreign press of China, I had little to cheer 
me on my way. Nothing, in truth, but a letter of introduc- 
tion to Mao Tse-tung, chairman of the Soviet Government. 
All I had to do was to find him. Through what adventures? 

I did not know. But thousands of lives had been sacrificed 
in these years of Kuomintang-Communist warfare. Could 
one foreign neck be better hazarded than in an effort to 
discover why? I found myself somewhat attached to the 
neck in question, but I concluded that the price was nor too - 
high to pay. 

In this melodramatic mood I set out. 


=0 — 

2 ' 

Slow Train to ^TVesteiii Peace’’ 

■< it= 

I T WAS early June and Peking wore the green lace of 
spring, its thousands of willows and imperial cypresses 
making of the Forbidden City a place of wonder and en- 



10 !>: SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

chantmcnt, and in many cool gardens it was impossible to 
believe in the China of breaking toil, starvation, revolution 
and foreign invasion that lay beyond the glittering roofs 
of the palaces. Here the well-fed foreigners could live in 
their own little never-never land of whisky-and-soda, polo, 
tennis and gossip, happily quite unaware of the pulse of 
humanity outside the great city’s silent, insulating walls — 
as indeed many did. 

And yet, during the past year, even the oasis of Peking 
had been invaded by the atmosphere of struggle that hovers 
over all China. Threats of Japanese conquest had provoked 
great demonstrations of the people, especially among the 
enraged youth. A few months earlier I had stood under the 
bullet-pitted Tartar Wall and seen ten thousand students 
gather, defiant of the gendarmes’ clubbings, to shout in a 
mighty chorus: “Resist Japan! Reject the demands of 
Japanese imperialism for the separation of North China 
from the South!’’ 

All Peking’s defensive masonry could not prevent re- 
verberations of the Chinese Red Anny’s sensational attempt 
to march through Shansi to the Great Wall — ostensibly to 
begin a war against Japan for recovery of the lost territories. 
This somewhat quixotic expedition had been promptly 
blocked by eleven divisions of Generalissimo' Chiang Kai- 
shek’s crack new army, but that had not prevented patriotic 
students from courting imprisonment and possible death 
by massing in the streets and uttering the forbidden slogans: 
“Cease civil war! Co-operate with the Communists to resist 
Japan! Save China!” 

One midnight I climbed aboard a dilapidated train, feel- ■ 
ing a little ill, but in a state of high excitement. Excitement 
because before me lay a journey of exploration into a land 
hundreds of years and hundreds of miles removed from the 
medieval splendoui's of the Forbidden City: I was bound 
for “Red China.” And “a little ill” because I had taken all 



12 


IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

In the morning I inspected my travelling companions and 
found a youth and a handsome old man with a wisp of 
gray beard sitting opposite me, sipping bitter tea. Presently 
the youth spoke to me, in formalities at first, and then 
inevitably of politics. I discovered that his wife’s uncle was 
a railway official and that he was travelling with a pass. He 
was on his way back to Szechuan, his native province, which 
he had left seven years before. But he was not sure that he 
would be able to visit his home town, after all. Bandits were 
reported to be operating near there. 

“You mean Reds?” 

“Oh, no, not Reds, although there are Reds in Szechuan, 
too. No, I mean bandits.” 

“But aren’t the Reds also bandits?” I asked out of curi- 
osity. “The newspapers always call them Red-bandits or 
Communist-bandits.” 

“Ah, but you must know that the editors must call them 
bandits because they are ordered to do so by Nanking,” 
he explained. “If they called them Communists or revolu- 
tionaries that would prove they were Communists them- 
selves.” 

“But in Szechuan don’t people fear the Reds as much 
as the bandits?” 

“Well, that depends. Tlie rich men fear them, and the 
landlords, and the officials and tax-collectors, yes. But the 
peasants do not fear them. Sometimes they welcome them.” 
Then he glanced apprehensively at the old man, who sat 
listening intently, and yet seeming not to listen. “You see,” 
he continued, “the peasants are too ignorant to understand 
that the Reds only tvant to use them. They think the Reds 
really mean what they say.” 

“But they don’t mean it?” 

“My father wrote to me that they did abolish usury and 
opium in the Sungpan [Szechuan], and that they redis- 
tributed the land there. So you see they are not exactly 



SLOW TRAIN TO “WESTERN PEACE” 1 3 

bandits. They have principles, all right. But they are wicked 
men. They kill too many people.” 

Then surprisingly the greybeard lifted his gentle face 
and with perfect composure made an astonishing remark. 
“Sha pu kou/” he said. “They don’t kill enough!” We both 
looked at him flabbergasted. 

Unfortunately, the train was nearing Chengchow, where 
I had to transfer to the Lunghai line, and I was obliged to 
break off the discussion. But I have ever since wondered 
with what deadly evidence this Confucian-looking old gen- 
tleman would have supported his startling contention. I 
wondered about it all the next day of travel, as we climbed 
slowly through the weird levels of loess hills in Honan and 
Shensi, and until my train — this one still new and very 
comfortable — rolled up to the recent and handsome railway 
station at Sianfu. 

Soon after my arrival I went to call on General Yang 
Hu-cheng, Pacification Commissioner of Shensi province. 
General Yang was until a couple of years ago undisputed 
monarch of those parts of Shensi not controlled by the 
Reds. A former bandit, he rose to authority via the route 
that has put many of China’s ablest leaders in office, and on 
the same highway he is said to have accumulated the cus- 
tomary fortune. But recently he had been obliged to divide 
his power with several other gentlemen in the North-west. 
For, in 1935, the “Young Marshal,” Chang Hsueh-liang, 
who used to be ruler of Manchuria, brought his army into 
Shensi, and assumed office in Sianfu as supreme Red-chaser 
in these parts — ^^^ice-Commander of the National Bandit- 
Suppression Commission. And to watch the Young Marshal 
had come Shao Li-tzu, an acol^ae of Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek. The Hon. Shao was Governor of Shensi. 

A delicate balance of power v'as maintained between 
these figures — and still others. Tugging strings behind all 
of them was the redoubtable Generalissimo himself, who 



14 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

sought to extend his dictatorship to the North-west, and 
liquidate not only the struggling Soviet democracy, but 
also the troops of old Yang Hu-cheng and young Chang 
Hsueh-liang, by the simple process of using each to destroy 
the other — three acts of a brilliant politico-military drama 
the main stratagem of which Chiang evidently believed was 
understood only by himself. And it was this error in calcu- 
lation, a little too much haste in pursuit of the purpose, a 
little too much confidence in his adversaries’ stupidity, 
which was in a few months to land Chiang Kai-shek a pris- 
oner in Sianfu, at the mercy of all three! Later on I shall tell 
of this amazing arrest of the Generalissimo, and show how 
it canalized the history of China in new directions, 

I found General Yang in a newly finished stone mansion, 
iust completed at a cost of $50,000. But he was living in 
this many-chambered vault — the official home of the Pacifi- 
cation Commissioner — all alone. Yang Hu-cheng, like many 
Chinese in this transitional period, was burdened with do- 
mestic infelicity, for he was a two-wife man. The first was 
the lily-footed wife of his youth, betrothed to him by his 
parents in Pucheng. The second, as vivacious and courageous 
a woman as Mme. Chiang Kai-shek, was a pretty young 
mother of five children, modern and progressive, a former 
Communist, they say, and the girl that Yang had chosen 
himself. It seemed, according to the missionaries, that when 
he opened his new home eich of his wives had presented 
him with the same minimum demand. Each detested the 
other; each had borne him sons and had the right to be 
legal wife; and each resolutely refused to move into the 
stone mansion unless the other stayed behind. 

To an outsider the case looked simple: a divorce or a 
third wife was the obvious solution. But General Yang had 
not made up his mind and so he still lived alone. His dilemma 
was a not uncommon one in modern China, Chiang Kai-shek 
had faced a similar issue when he married rich, American- 



SLOW TRAIN TO “WESTERN PEACE” 1 5 

educated Soong Mei-ling, who as a Methodist was not pre- 
pared to accept polygamy. Chiang had finally divorced his 
first wife (the mother of his son Ching-kuo) and pensioned 
off his two concubines. The decision was highly approved 
by the missionaries, who have ever since prayed for his 
soul. Nevertheless, this way out — a new-fangled idea im- 
ported from the West — is still frowned upon by many 
Chinese. Old Yang, having risen from the people, was prob- 
ably less concerned over the disposal of his soul than the 
traditions of his ancestors. 

And it must not be supposed that Yang’s early career as 
a bandit necessarily disqualified him as a leader. Such as- 
sumptions cannot be made in China, where a career of' 
banditry in early youth often indicates a man of strong 
character and purpose. If you look through Chinese history 
you will find that some of China’s ablest patriots were at 
one time or another labelled bandits. The fact is that many 
of the worst rogues, scoundrels and traitors have climbed 
to power under cover of respectability, the putrid hypocrisy 
of Confucian maxims, and the priestcraft of the Chinese 
classics — though they have very often utilized the good 
strong arm of an honest bandit in doing so — and all this is 
still more or less true today. 

General Yang was in any case in bad repute among the 
local foreign missionaries, so he could not have been a really 
wicked fellow. His history as a revolutionary suggests a 
rugged peasant, who once may have had high dreams of 
making a big change in his world, but who, finding himself 
in power, looked vainly for a method, and grew weary and 
confused, listening to the advice of the mercenaries who 
gathered round him. But if he had such dreams he did not 
confide them to me. He declined to discuss political ques- 
tions, and courteously delegated one of his secretaries to 
show me the city. He was. also suffering from a severe 
headache and rheumatism when I saw him, and in the 



1 6 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

midst of his sea of troubles I was not one to insist upon 
asking him nettling questions. On the contrary, in his 
dilemma he had all my sympathy. So after a brief interview 
with him I discreetly retired, to seek some answers from 
the Honourable Governor, Shao Li-tzu. 

Governor Shao received me in the garden of his spacious 
yamen, cool and restful after the parching heat of Sian’s 
dusty streets. I had last seen him six years before, when he 
was Chiang Kai-shek’s personal secretary, and at that time 
he had assisted me in an interview with the Generalissimo. 
Since then, he had risen rapidly in the Kuomintang. He was 
an able man, well educated, and the Generalissimo had now 
bestowed upon him the honours of a governorship. But 
poor Shao, like many another civil governor, did not rule 
much beyond the provincial capital’s grey walls — the out- 
lying territory being divided by General Yang and the 
Young Marshal. 

It is perhaps impolite to mention it, but the Hon. Shao 
was once a “Communist-bandit” himself. He was, in fact, a 
founder of the Chinese Communist Party. But he should not 
be judged too harshly: in tho se days it was fashionable to 
be a Communist and nobody was very sure exactly what it 
meant, except that all bright young men were Communists. 
Later on he had recanted, for after 1927 it had become very 
clear what it meant, and ymu could have your head removed 
for it. Shao then became a devout Buddhist, and subse- 
quently displayed no further signs 'of heresy. He is one of 
the most charming gentlemen in China. 

“How are the Reds getting along?” I asked him. 

“There are not many left. Those in Shensi are only 
remnants.” 

“Then the war continues?” I asked. 

“No, at present there is little fighting in north Shensi. 
The Reds are moving into Ninghsia and Kansu. They seem 
to want to connect with Outer Mongolia.” 

He shifted the conversation to the situation in the South- 



SOME HAN BRONZES 


17 

west, where insurgent generals were then demanding an 
anti-Japanese expedition. I asked him whether he thought 
China should fight Japan. “Can we?” he demanded. And 
then the Buddhist governor told me exactly what he thought 
about Japan — not for publication — just as every Kuomin- 
tang official would then tell you his opinion of Japan — not 
for publication. 

A few months after this interview poor Shao was to be 
put in a spot on this question of war with Japan — along 
with his Generalissimo — by some rebellious young men of 
Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang’s army, who refused to be rea- 
sonable and take “maybe some day” for an answer any 
longer. And Shao’s diminutive wife — a returned student 
from Moscow and a former Communist herself — ^\vas to be 
cornered by some of the insurrectionists and make a plucky 
fight to resist arrest. 

But Shao revealed no premonition of all this in our talk, 
and an exchange of views having brought us perilously near 
agreement, it was time to leave. I had already learned from 
Shao Li-tzu what I wanted to know. He had confirmed the 
word of my Peking informant, that fighting had temporarily 
halted in north Shensi. Therefore it should be possible to 
go to the front, if properly arranged. I proceeded to make 
the arrangements. 


4 

^ome Han Bronzes 

4 J: 

S OAIE six months aftpr my arrival in Sianfu the crisis in 
the North-west was to explode in a manner nobody 
had anticipated, so that the whole u'orld was made dramat- 



l8 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

ically aware of an amazing alliance between the big army 
under Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang, and the “bandits” which 
he had been ordered, as deputy Commander-in-Chief of the 
Communist-Suppression Forces, to destroy. But in June, 
1936, the outside world was still in complete ignorance of 
these strange developments, and even in the headquarters 
of Chiang Kai-shek’s own Blueshirt gendarmes, who con- 
trolled the Sianfu police, nobody knew exactly Avhat was 
taking place. Over 300 Communists were imprisoned in the 
city’s jail, and the Blueshirts were hunting for more. An 
atmosphere of extr-eme tension prevailed. Spies and counter- 
spies were everywhere. 

But there is now no longer any necessity to remain 
covert about those exciting days, with the secrets of which 
I was perforce entrusted, so here it can be told. 

I had never seen a Red Army man before I arrived in 
Sianfu. The man in Peiping who had written for me in 
invisible ink the letter addressed to Mao Tse-tung was, I 
knew, a Red commander; but I had not seen him. The letter 
had reached me through a third person, an old friend: but 
besides this letter I had only one hope of a connection in 
the North-west. I had been instructed simply to go- to an 
hotel in Sianfu, take a room there, and await a visit from a 
gentleman who would call himself Wang, but about whom 
I knew nothing else. Nothing — except that he would ar- 
range for me to enter the Red districts by way' of the 
private aeroplane, I was promised, of Chang Hsueh-liang! 

A few days after I put up in the hotel a large, somewhat 
florid and rotund, but strongly built and dignified Chinese, 
wearing a long, grey silk gown, entered my open door and 
greeted me in excellent English. He looked like a prosperous 
merchant, but he introduced himself as Wang, mentioned 
the name of my Peiping friend, and otherwise established 
that he v/as the man I awaited. 

In the week that followed I discovered that Wano- alone 



SOME HAN BRONZES 


19 

was worth the trip to Sianfu. I spent four or five hours a 
day listening to his yarns and reminiscences and to his more 
serious explanations of the political situation. He was wholly 
unexpected. Educated in a missionary school in Shanghai, 
he had been prominently identified with the Christian com- 
munity, had once had a church of his own, and (as I was 
later to learn) was known among the Communists as Wang 
A 4 u-shih — Wang the Pastor. Like many successful Cliristians 
of Shanghai, he had been a member of the Ch’ing Pang, the 
Tammany of that city, and he knew everyone from Chiang 
Kai-shek (also a member) down to Tu Yueh-sheng, the 
Ch’ing Pang chieftain. He had once been a high official in 
the Kuomintang, but I cannot even now disclose his real 
name. 

For some time. Pastor Wang, having deserted his con- 
gregation and officialdom, had been working with the Reds. 
How long I do not know. He was a kind of secret and un- 
official ambassador to the courts of various militarists and 
officials whom the Communists were trying to win over to 
understanding and support of their “anti-Japanese national 
front” proposals. With Chang Hsueh-liang, at least, he had 
been successful. And here some background is necessary to 
illuminate the basis of the secret understanding which had 
at this time been reached. 

Chang Hsueh-liang, as everyone knows, was until 1931 
the popular, gambling, generous, modem-minded, golf- 
playing, dope-using, paradoxical Avarlord-dictator of the 
30,000,000 people of Manchuria, confirmed in the office he 
had inherited from his ex-bandit father Chang Tso-lin by 
the Kuomintang Government at Nanking, which had also 
given him the title Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Armed 
Forces of China. In September, 1931, Japan set out to con- 
quer the North-east, and Cliang’s reverses began. When the 
invasion commenced. Young Marshal Chang was in the 
Peking Union Plospital, below the Wall, recovering from 



20 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

typhoid, and in no condition to meet this crisis alone. He 
leaned heavily on Nanking and on his blood-sworn “elder 
brother,” Chiang Kai-shek, the Generalissimo. But Chiang 
Kai-shek, who wanted to avoid war at all costs, urged non- 
resistance, withdrawal, and reliance on the League of Na- 
tions. Sick, young (he was only thirty-three), inexperi- 
enced, and surrounded by corrupt and incompetent re- 
tainers, Chang Hsueh-liang took the Generalissimo’s counsel 
and Nanking’s orders. As a result he lo.st his homeland, 
Manchuria, after only token resistance was offered by his 
retreating troops. Nanking propaganda made it appear that 
the non-resistance policy was the Young Marshal’s idea, 
whereas the record shows that it was the government’s ex- 
plicit order. Anyway the sacrifice enabled the Generalissimo 
to hold his own shaky regime together in Nanking and be- 
gin a new annihilation campaign against the Reds. 

This is how the bulk of the Manchurian troops, known 
in China as the Turigpei (pronounced Dimgbei, and mean- 
ing “North-eastern”) Army, moved south of the Great 
Wall into China proper. The same thing happened when 
Japan invaded Jehol. Chang Hsueh-liang was not in the 
hospital then, but he should have been. Nanking sent no 
supp'ort to him, and made no preparations for defence. The 
Generalissimo, to avoid war, was ready to see Jehol fall 
to Japan, too — and so it did. But Chang Hsueh-liang got 
the blame, and docilely played the goat when somebody had 
to resign to appease an infuriated populace. It was Chiang 
or Chang — and the latter bowed and departed. He went to 
Europe for a year “to study conditions.” 

Now the most important thing that happened to Chang 
Hsueh-liang while he was in Europe was not that he saw 
Mussolini and Hitler and met Ramsay MacDonald, but it 
was that for the first time in several years he found himself 
a healthy man, cured of the dope habit. Some years before 
he had taken up opium, as many Chinese generals do, be- 



SOME HAN BRONZES 


2 I 

tween battles. To break himself of the habit was not easy: 
he had no time for the long cure necessary; but a doctor 
in whom he naively placed confidence had assured him he 
could cure him by injections. He freed him of the craving 
for opium, all right, but when he got through tvith him 
the Young Marshal was a morphine addict. 

When I first met Chang at Alukden, in 1929, he was the 
world’s youngest dictator, and he still looked fairly well. 
He was thin, his face somewhat drawn and jaundiced-look- 
ing, but his mind was quick and energetic, he seemed full 
of exuberance, he was openly, bitterly anti-Japanese, and 
he was eager to perform miracles in driving Japan from 
China and modernizing Manchuria. Several years later his 
physical condition was much worse. One of his doctors in 
Peiping told me that he was spending S200 a day on “medi- 
cine” — a special preparation of morphine which theoreti- 
cally could be “tapered off.” 

But in Shanghai, just before leaving for Europe, Chang 
Hsueh-liang won a great victor}E He conquered himself of 
the drug habit. When he returned to China in 1934 his 
friends were pleased and amazed: he had put on weight and 
muscle, there v^as colour in his cheeks, he looked ten }^ears 
younger, and people saw in him traces of the brilliant 
vertebrate leader of his youth again. He had always pos- 
sessed a quick, realistic mind, and now he gave it a chance 
to develop. At Hankow he resumed command of the 
Tungpei Army, vdiich had been shifted to Central China 
to figlit the Reds. It was a tribute to his popularity that, 
despite his errors of the past, his men enthusiastically wel- 
comed him back. 

Chang adopted a new routine — up at six, hard exercise, 
daily drill and study, simple food and Spartan habits, and 
direct personal contact with the subalterns as well as of- 
ficers of his troops, which still numbered about 140,000 
men. A new Tungpei Army began to emerge. Sceptics 



22 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

gradually became convinced that the Young A/Iarshal had 
again become a man worth watching, and took seriously 
the vow that he had made on his return: that his whole 
life would be devoted to the task of recovering Manchuria, 
and erasing the humiliation of his people. 

Meanwhile, Chang had not lost faith in the Generalis- 
simo. In their entire relationship Chang had never wavered 
in his loyalty to the older man, whose regime he had three 
times saved from collapse, and in whose judgment and 
sincerity he placed full confidence. He evidently believed 
Chiang Kai-shek when he said he was preparing to recover 
Manchuria, and would yield ho more territory without re- 
sistance. But in 1935 Japan’s militarists continued their ag- 
gression; the puppet regime of east Hopei was set up, part 
of Chahar v^as annexed, and demands were made for the 
separation of North China from the South, to which Nan- 
king partly acquiesced. Ominous discontent rumbled 
through the Young Marshal’s officers and men, especially 
after his troops were shifted to the North-west to continue 
to wage an unpopular civil war against the Red Army, 
while not a shot was fired against Japan. 

After months of fighting the Reds in the South, several 
important realizations had come to the Young ?vlarshal and 
some of his officers: that the “bandits” they were fighting 
were in reality led by able, patriotic, anti-Japanese com- 
manders; that this process of “Communist extermination” 
might last for many more years; that it 'was impossible to 
resist Japan v/hile the anti-Red wars continued; and that 
meanwhile the Tungpei Anny was rapidly being reduced 
and disbanded in battles which were to it devoid of mean- 
ing. 

Nevertheless, ■when Chang shifted his headquarters to 
the North-west, he began an energetic campaign against the 
Reds. For a while he had some success, but in October and 
November, 1935, the Tungpei Army suffered serious de-r 



SOME HAN BRONZES 23 

feats, losing two whole divisions (the loist and 109th) and 
part of a third (noth). Thousands of Tungpei soldiers 
turned over to the Red Army. Many officers were also 
taken captive, and held for a period of “anti-Japanese 
tutelage.” 

When these officers were released, and returned to Sian, 
they brought back to the Young Marshal glowing accounts 
of the morale and organization in the Soviet districts, but 
especially of the Red Army’s sincerity in wanting to stop 
civil war, unify China by peaceful democratic methods, and 
unite to oppose Japanese imperialism. Chang was impressed. 
He was impressed even more by reports from his divisions 
that the sentiment throughout the whole army was turning 
against war with the Reds, tvhose slogans — “Chinese must 
not fight Chinese!” and “Unite with us and fight back to 
A'lanchuria!” — were infecting the rank and file of the entire 
Tungpei Army. 

In the meantime, Chang himself had been strongly in- 
fluenced to the Left. Many of the students in his Tungpei 
University had come to Sian and v'ere working with him, 
and among these Avere some Communists. After the Japanese 
demands in Peldng of December, 1935, he had sent word 
to the North that all anti-Japanese students, regardless of 
their political beliefs, could find haven in Sianfu. While 
anti-Japanese agitators throughout China were being ar- 
rested by Nanking, in Shensi they were encouraged and 
protected. Some of Chang’s younger officers had been much 
influenced by the students also, and when the captured 
officers returned from the Red districts and reported that 
.open anti-Japanese mass organizations v'cre flourishing 
dicre, and described the Reds’ patriotic propaganda among 
die people, Chang began to think more and more of the 
Reds as natural allies rather than enemies. 

It was at this point, early in 1936, Pastor Wang told me, 
that he one day called on Chang Hsueh-liang and opened an 



24 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

interview by declaring: “I have come to borrow your aero- 
plane to go to the Red districts.” 

Chang jumped up and stared in amazement. “What? You 
dare to come here and make such a request? Do you realize 
you can be shot for this?” 

The Pastor elaborated. He explained that he had contacts 
with the Communists, and knew things which Chang should 
know. He talked for a long time about their changing poli- 
cies, about the necessity for a united China to resist Japan, 
about the Reds’ willingness to make big concessions in or- 
der to influence Nanking to resist Japan, a policy which the 
Reds realized they could not, alone, make effective. He pro- 
posed that he should arrange for a further discussion of these 
points between Chang and certain Red leaders. And to all of 
this, after his hist surprise, Chang listened attentively. He 
had for some time been thinking that he could make use of 
the Reds: they also evidently believed they could 'make use 
of him; very well, perhaps they could utilize each other on' 
the basis of common demands for an end to civil war and 
resistance to Japan. 

The Pastor did, after all, fly to Yenan, North Shensi, in 
the Young Marshal’s private aeroplane. He entered Soviet 
China, and returned with a formula fpr negotiation. And 
a short time later Chang Hsueh-liang himself flew up to 
Yenan, met Chou En-lai, a Red commander (of whom more 
later), and after long and detailed discussion with him be-f 
came convinced of the Reds’ sincerity, and of the sanity and 
practicability of their proposals for a united front. 

First steps in the implementation of the Tungpei-Com- 
munist agreement included the cessation of hostilities in 
Shensi. Neither side was to move v'ithout notifying the 
other. The Reds sent several delegates to Sianfu, who put on 
Tungpei uniforms, joined Chang Hsueh-liang’s staff, and 
helped reorganize political training methods in his army. A 
new school was opened at Wang Ch’u Ts’un, and here 



SOME HAN BRONZES 


25 

Chang’s lower officers went through intensified courses in 
politics, economics, social science, and detailed and statistical 
study of how Japan had conquered Manchuria and what 
China had lost thereby. Hundreds of radical students flocked 
to Sian, and entered another anti-Japanese political training 
school, to which the Young Marshal also gave frequent lec- 
tures. Something like the political commissar system used in 
Soviet Russia and by the Chinese Red Army was adopted in 
the Tungpei Army. A number of old and feudal-minded 
higher officers inherited from the Manchurian da}’S were 
' sacked; to replace them Chang Hsueh-liang promoted more 
radical, younger officers, to M’hom he now looked for his 
main support in building a new army. Many of the corrupt 
sycophants who had surrounded Chang during his “play- 
boy” years were also given the gate and u^ere i-eplaced by 
eager and serious-minded students from the Tungpei Uni- 
versity. 

But most of these changes developed in an atmosphere of 
close secrecy. Although the Tungpei troops no longer 
fought the Reds, there were Nanking troops along the 
Shansi-Shensi border, and also in Kansu and Ninghsia, and 
stiff fighting continued in these regions. No word of the real 
relations between Chang and the Communists crept into the 
press. And, although Chiang Kai-slick’s spies in Sian knew 
that -.something u'as fermenting, they could get few details 
of its e.vact nature. Occasional trucks arrived in Sian, carry- 
ing Red passengers, but they looked innocuous enough, for 
they all wore Tungpei uniforms. And the occasional depar- 
ture of other trucks from Sian to the Red districts aroused 
no suspicion, for they resembled any other Tungpei trucks 
setting off for the front. 

It was on just such a truck. Pastor M^ang confided to me 
soon after my arrival, that 1 would myself be going to the 
front. The journey b}- plane Avas out: too much risk of em- 
barrassment to the Young Manshal Avas inA^olved, for his 



26 . IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

American pilots might not hold their tongues if a foreigner- 
were dumped on the front and not returned. 

One morning the Pastor called on me with a Tungpei 
officer — or at any rate a youth wearing the uniform of- a 
Tungpei officer — and suggested a trip by car to the ancient 
Han city, outside Sian. A curtained car waited for us in front 
of the hotel, and when v/e got in I saw in a corner a man 
wearing dark glasses and the Chung Shan uniform of a 
Kuomintang official. We drbve out to the site of the old 
palace of the Han dynasty, and there w^e walked over to the 
raised mound of earth where the illustrious Han Wu Ti 
once sat in his Throne Room and ruled the earth. Here you 
can still pick up fragments of tile from those great roofs of 
over 2,000 years ago. 

Pastor Wang and the Tungpei officer had some words to 
exchange, and stood apart, talking. The Kuomintang official, 
who had sat without speaking during our long dusty drive, 
came over to me and removed his dark glasses and his white > 
hat, I saw that he was quite young. Under a rim of thick, 
glossy hair a pair of intense eyes sparkled at me. A mis- 
chievous grin spread over his bronzed face, and one look at 
him, without those glasses, showed you that the uniform was 
a disguise, that this was no sedentary bureaucrat, but an out- 
of-doors man of action. He was of medium height and 
looked slight of strength, so that when he came close to me , 
and suddenly took my arm in a grip of iron I winced Avith, 
surprise. There Avas a pantherish grace about the man’s 
moA’-ements, I noticed later, a lithe limberness under the stiff 
formal cut of the suit. 

He put his face close to mine and grinned and fixed his 
sharp burning eyes on me and held my two arms tightly in 
that iron grip, and then Avagged his head and comically 
screAved up his mouth — and AAunked! “Look at me!” he 
Avhispered AAUtli the delight of a child AAUth a secret. “Look 
at me! Look at me! Do ydu recognize me.^” 

I did not know Avhat to think of the felloAv. He was so 



SOME HAN BRONZES ^7 

bubblinsr over about somethin? that his excitement infected 
me, and I felt foolish because I had nothing to say. Recog- 
nize him? I had never met a Chinese like him in my life! 
I shook my head apologetically. 

He released a hand from my arm and pointed a finger at 
his chest. “I thought maybe you had seen my picture some- 
Avhere,” he said. “Well, I am Teng Fa,” he offered — “Tejig 
Fa!” He pulled back his head and gazed at me to see the 
effect of the bombshell. 

Teng, Fa? Teng Fa . . . why, of course, Teng Fa was 
chief of the Chinese Red Army’s Gaypayoo. And something 
else, there was $50,000 on his head! 

Teng danced with pleasure when he disclosed his iden- 
tity. He was irrepressible, tickled with amusement at the 
situation: he, the notorious “Communist-bandit,” living in 
the ver)?^ midst of the enemy’s camp, thumbing his nose at 
the spies that hovered everywhere. And he was overjoyed 
at seeing me — he literally hugged me repeatedly — an Ameri- 
can who was voluntarily going into the “bandit” are.as. He 
offered me everything. Did I want his horse? Oh, what a 
horse he had, the finest in Red China! His pictures? He had 
a wonderful collection and it was all mine. His diary? He 
would send instructions to his wife, v'ho v'as still in the 
Soviet areas, to give all this and more to me. And he kept 
his word. 

What a Chinese! What a Red-bandit! 

This Teng Fa, a Cantonese, was the son of a v'orking- 
class family, and had once been a foreign-style cook on a 
Canton-Hongkong steamer. He had been a leader of the 
great Hongkong shipping strike, when he v'as beaten in the 
chest, and most of his ribs broken, by a British constable 
who did not like pickets. And then he had become a Com- 
munist, and entered Whampoa, and taken part in the Na- 
tionalist Revolution, until after 1927 he had joined the Red 
Army in Kiangsi. 

stood for an hour or more on that height, talking 



IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 


28 

and looking down on that green-shrouded grave of an im- 
perial city, and I cannot describe to you the strange emo- 
tional impact of that moment — so much intensified by our 
surroundings, so queerly premonitional, so oddly detached 
from me somehow, and part of the variegated history of 
China; for how incongruous and yet how logical that this 
place should seem to these Communists the one safe rendez- 
vous where we four could safely meet, and after all how 
appropriate to greet this breath-taking young warrior of the 
revolution of today on the exact spot where, over two mil- 
lenniums ago, the great Hans, radical enough in their own 
way and in their time, had ruled a united and then progres- 
sive China, and so successfully consolidated a people and a 
culture from the chaos of warring States that their descend- 
ants, ever since, have been content to call themselves Sons 
of Han. 

It was here that Teng told me who would escort me to 
the Red districts, how I would travel, how I would live in 
Red China, and assured me of a warm welcome there. 

“Aren’t you afraid for your head.>” I asked as we drove 
back to the city. 

“Not any more than Chang Hsueh-liang is,” he chuckled; 
^‘I’m liviuCT with him.” 

D 


4 

4 

Through Red Gates 


4 > 


W E LEFT Sianfu before dawn, the high wooden gates 
of the once “golden city” swinging open and noisily 
diagging their chains before the magic of our militar)^ pass. 



THROUGH RED GATES 


29 

In the half-light of pre-dawn the big army truck lumbered 
past the aerodrome from which expeditions set out for daily 
reconnaissance and bombincf over the Red lines. 

O 

To a Chinese traveller every mile of this road northward 
from Sianfu evokes memories of the rich and colourful pag- 
eant of his people. It seemed not inappropriate that the latest 
historical mutation in China, the Communist movement, 
should choose this locale in which to work out a destiny. 
In an hour we were being ferried across the Wei River, in 
whose rich valley the wild dark men whp w^re Confucius’ 
ancestors developed their rice-culture, and formulated tra- 
ditions still a power in the folk-myth of rural China today. 
And towards noon we had reached Ta’un Pu. It was near 
this battlemented city that the towering and terrible figure 
who first “unified” China — the Emperor Ch’in Shih Huang 
Ti — ^\vas born some 2,200 years ago. The Emperor Ch’in first 
consolidated all the ancient frontier walls of his country into 
what remains today the most stupendous masonry on earth 
— the Great Wall of China. 

Opium poppies nodded their swollen heads, ready for 
harvest, along the newly completed motor road — a road al- 
ready deeply wrinkled -w'ith xvashouts and ruts, so that at 
times it was scarcely navigable even for our six-ton Dodge 
truck. Shensi has long been a noted opium province. During 
the great North-w'est Famine which a feu’’ years ago took a 
toll of 3,000,000 lives, American Red Cross investigators 
attributed much of the tragedy to the cultivation of the 
poppy, forced upon the peasants by ta.x-greedy militarists. 
The best land being devoted to the poppy, in years of 
drought there was a serious shortage of millet, wheat and 
corn, the staple cereals of the North-W'est. 

I spent the night on a clay k'ang,^ in a filthy hut at Loch- 

^ .-V k'anp; is a raised earthen platform I)uilt in Cliincsc houses, avith 
a fireplace at one end. The flue is arranged in a maze beneath, so that 
it iicats the clay platform, if desired. 



30 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

uan, with pigs and donkeys quartered in the next room, and 
rats in my own, and I’m sure we all slept very little. Next 
morning, a few miles beyond that city, the loess terraces 
rose higher and more imposing, and the country was weirdly 
transformed. 

The wonderful loess lands, which cover much of Kansu, 
Shensi, Ninghsia and Shansi provinces, account for the mar- 
vellous fertility of these regions (when there is rainfall), for 
the loess furnishes an inexhaustible porous topsoil tens of 
feet deep. Geologists think the loess is organic matter blown 
down in centuries past from Mongolia and from the west, 
by the great winds that rise in Central Asia. Scenically the 
result is an infinite variety of queer, embattled shapes — hills 
like great castles, like rows of mammoth, nicely rounded 
scones, like ranges forn by some giant hand, leaving behind 
the imprint of angry fingers. Fantastic, incredible, and some- 
times frightening shapes, a world configurated by a mad 
god — and yet sometimes a world also of strange surrealist 
beauty. 

And though you see fields and cultivated land every- 
vdiere, you seldom see houses. The peasants are tucked away 
in those loess hills also. Throughout the North-west, as has 
been the habit of centuries, men live in homes dug out of 
the hard, fudge-coloured cliffs — yao fang, or “cave houses,” 
as the Chinese call them. But they are no caves in the West- 
ern sense. Cool in summer, warm in winter, they are easily 
built and easily cleaned. Even the wealthiest landlords often 
dig their homes in the hills. Some of them are many-roomed 
edifices gaily furnished and decorated, with stone floors and 
high-ceilinged chambers, lighted through rice-paper win- 
dow's opened in the walls of earth also athwart the stout, 
black -lacquered doors. 

Opce, not far from Locliuan, a young Tungpei officer, 
who rode beside me in the cavorting truck, pointed to such 



THROUGH RED GATES 


31 

a yao-fang-ts'zin — a cave village. It lay only a mile or so dis- 
tant from the motor road, just across a deep ravine. 

“They are Reds,” he revealed. “One of our detachments 
was sent over there to buy millet a few u^eks ago, and those 
villagers refused to sell us a catty of it. The stupid soldiers 
took some b}' force. As they retired the peasants shot at 
them.” He swung his. arms in an arc including everything on 
each side of the highway, so carefully guarded by dozens of 
pao'-Iei — hilltop machine-gun nests — manned by Kuomin- 
tang troops. he said, “everything out there is 

Red-bandit territory.” 

I gazed towards the spaces indicated with keener inter- 
est, for it was into that horizon of unknown hill and upland 
that I intended, within a few hours, to make my way. 

On the road we passed part of the 105th Division, all 
Manchurians, moving back from Yenan to Lochuan. They 
were lean and sturdy youths, most of them taller than the 
average Chinese soldier. At a roadside inn we stopped to 
drink tea, and I sat down near several of them who were 
resting. They avere just returning from Wa Ya Pao, in north 
Shensi, where there had been a skirmish with the Reds. I 
overheard scraps of conversation between them. Tliey were 
talking about the Reds. 

“They cat a lot better than we do,” one argued. 

“Yes — cat the flesh of the lao-^pai-hsingf'^ another re- 
, plied. 

“Never mind that — a few landlords — it’s all to the good. 
Who thanked us for coming to Wa Ya Pao? Th.e landlords! 
Isn’t it a fact? Why should we kill ourselves for these rich 
men?” 

“They say more than three thousand of our Tungpei 
men are with them now. . . .” 

Lao-pat-hs'wg, literally “old hundred names,” is the colloquia* 
Chinese expression for the country people. 



32 


IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

“Another thing on their side. Why should we fight our 
own people, when none of us want to fight anybody, unless 
it’s a Japanese, eh?” 

An officer approached and this promising conversation 
came to an end. The officer ordered them to move on. They 
picked up their rifles and trudged off down the road. Soon 
afterwards we drove away. 

Early in the afternoon of the second day we reached 
Ycnan, vdiere north Shensi’s single road fit for wheeled traf- 
fic comes to an end — about 400 li^ more or less, south of the 
Great Wall. It is an historic town: through it, in centuries 
past, have come the nomadic raiders from the north, and 
through it swept the great Mongol cavalry of Genghis Khan, 
in its ride of conquest towards Sianfu. 

Yenan is ideally suited for defence. Cradled in a bowl of 
high, rock-ribbed hills, its stout walls crawl up to the very 
tops. Attached to them now, like wasps’ nests, were newly 
made fortifications, where machine-guns bristled towards 
the Reds not far beyond. The road and its immediate envi- 
rons were then held by Tungpei troops, but until recently 
Yenan had been completely cut off. The Reds had turned 
upon their enemy the blockade which the Generalissimo en-, 
forced against themselves, and hundreds of people had died 
of starvation. 

Even aeroplanes had proved useless against the surround- 
ing Reds. They mounted machine-guns on the hilltops — 
lacking anti-aircraft guns — and used them so effectively that 
the Nanking pilots, forced to fly at high altitudes, had a 
long target for the bundles of provisions they attempted to 
drop inside the city walls. Most of them, in fact, landed in 
the arms of the Reds, who opened a market outside Yenan’s 
gates, and sold the food back to the beleaguered inliabitants. 
Chang Hsueh-liang’s own foreign pilots grew jittery from 
being shot at, and one American resigned. When I saw the 

^ One Chinese // is about a third of an English mile. 


THROUGH RED GATES 35 

Young Marshal’s beautiful Boeing, plane in Sianfu, riddled 
with bullet holes, I sympathized with the pilot. 

The long Red siege of Yenan ^ had been lifted a few 
weeks before I arrived, but signs of it were still evident in 
the famished-looking inhabitants, and the empty shelves or 
barred doors of shops. Little food was available and prices 
were alpine. What could be bought at all had been secured 
as a result of a temporary truce with the Red partisans. In 
return for an agreement not to take the offensive against the 
Soviet districts on this front, the Soviet peasants now sold 
grain and vegetables to the hungry anti-Red troops. 

I had my credentials for a visit to the front. My plan was 
to leave the city early next morning, and go towards the 
“White” lines, where the troops were merely holding their 
positions, without attempting any advance. Tlien I meant to 
branch off on one of the mountain lanes over which, I had 
been told, merchants smuggled their goods in and out of the 
Soviet regions. 

To state precisely the manner in Avhich, just as I had 
hoped, I did pass the last sentry and enter no-man’s-land, 
might incur serious difficulties for the Kuomintang adher- 
ents who assisted me on my way. Suffice it to say that my 
experience proved once more that anything is possible in 
China, if it is done in the Chinese manner. For by seven 
o’clock next morning I had really left the last Kuomintang 
machine-gun behind, and was walking through the thin strip 
of territory that divided Red from White. 

With me was a single muleteer, who had been hired for 
me by a Manchurian colonel in Yenan. He was to carry my 
scant belongings — bedding-roll, a little food, two cameras 
and t\t'enty-four rolls of film — to the first Red partisan out- 
post. I did not know whether he himself was a Red-bandit 
or a White-bandit — but bandit he certainly looked. All this 

^ Yenan was later occupied by the Red Army and became the 
provisional Red capital. 



34 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

territory having for several years alternately been controlled 
by armies of both colours, it was quite pQssible for him to 
have been either — or perhaps both. I decided it would be 
best not to ask impertinent questions, and merely docilely 
followed him, hoping for the best. 

For four hours we followed a small winding stream and 
did not see any sign of human life. There was no road at all, 
but only the bed of the stream that rushed swiftly between 
high walls of rock, above which rose swift hills of loess. It 
was the perfect setting for the blotting-out of a too inquisi- 
tive foreign devil. A disturbing factor was the muleteer’s 
frequently expressed admiration of my cowhide shoes. 

“Tao-la/” he suddenly shouted around his ear, as the 
rock walls at last gave way and opened out into a narrow 
valley, green with young wheat. “We have arrived!” 

Relieved, I gazed beyond him and saw in the side of a 
hill a loess village, where blue smoke curled from the tall, 
clay chimneys that stood up like long fingers against the 
face of the cliff. In a few minutes we were there. 

A young farmer, wearing a turban of white towelling on 
his head and a revolver strapped to his waist, came out and 
looked at me in astonishment. Who was I and what did 5 

I 

want? 

t 

“I am an American journalist,” I said in conformance 
with the instructions Wang the Pastor had given to me. “I 
want to see the local chief of the Poor People’s League.” 

He looked at me blankly and replied, p’aP'' 

Now hat p'a in any Chinese I had ever heard had only 
one meaning, “I’m afraid!” If he is afraid, I thought to my- 
self, what the devil am I supposed to feel? But his appear- 
ance belied his words: he looked completely self-assured. 
He turned to the loju and asked him who I was. 

The muleteer repeated what I had said, adding a few 
flourishes of his own. With relief, I saw the young farmer’s: 
face soften and then I noticed that he was really a good- 



THROUGH RED GATES 


35 

looking young man, with fine bronzed skin and good white 
teeth. He did not seem to belong to the race of timid peas- 
ants of China elsewhere. There was a challenge in his spar- 
kling merr)^ eyes, and a certain bravado. He slowly moved 
his hand away from his revolver butt and smiled. 

“I am that man,” he said. “I am the chief. Come inside 
and drink some hot tea.” 

These Shensi hill people have a dialect of their own, full 
of slurred colloquialisms, but they understand pai-lnia, or 
mandarin Chinese, and most of their own speech is quite 
comprehensible to an outlandir. iVfter a few more attempts 
at conversation with the chief, he began to show under- 
standing, and we made good progress. Occasionally into our 
talk, however, would creep this hai p’a business, but for a 
while I was too disconcerted to ask him just what he feared. 
When I finally did probe into the matter, I discovered that 
hat p''a in the dialect of the Shensi hills is the equivalent of 
pu chih-tao in mandarin Chinese. It simply means “don't 
understand.” My satisfaction at this discovery was consider- 
able. 

Seated on a felt-covered k^ang I told my host more about 
myself^ and my plans. In a short time he seemed reassured. 
I wanted to go to An Tsai — the county seat — ^where I’ then 
belieyed Soviet Chairman Mao Tse-tung to be. Could he 
give me a guide and a muleteer? 

Certainly, certainly, he agreed, but I should not think of 
moving in the heat of day. The sun had already climbed to 
its zenith, it was really very hot, I looked tired, and, mean- 
v^hile, had I eaten? Actually I was ravenous, and without 
any further ceremony I accepted this invitation to a first 
meal with a “Red-bandit.” My muleteer was anxious to re- 
turn to Yenan, and, paying him off, I bade him good-bye. 
It was a farewell to my last link with the White world for 
many weeks to come. I had crossed the Red Rubicon. 

I was now at the mercy of Mr. Liu Lung-huo — Liu the 



36 IN SEARCH OF RED CHINA 

Dragon Fire — as I learned the young peasant was called, and 
likewise at the mercy of his tough-looking comrades, who 
had begun to drift in fi'om neighbouring yao-fmg. Similarly 
clad and armed, they all looked at me curiously and laughed 
at my preposterous accent. 

Liu offered me tobacco, wine and tea, and plied me with 
numerous questions. He and his friends examined with close 
interest, interrupted by exclamations of approval, my cam- 
era, my shoes, my woollen stockings, the fabric of my cotton 
shorts, and (with lengthy admiration) the zipper on my 
khaki shirt. The general impression seemed to prevail that, 
however ridiculous it might look, the ensemble evidently 
served its purposes well enough. I did not know just what 
“Communism” might mean to these men, in practice, and I 
was prepared to see my belongings rapidly “redistributed” 
— but happily nothing of the sort occurred. As nearly as I 
could ascertain, the object of the minute examination I un- 
derwent (and it was much pleasanter than the customs ex- 
amination you submit to on other frontiers) was for the 
purpose of strengthening a previously held conviction that 
the foreign devil is incalculable. 

In an hour a vast platter of scrambled eggs arrived, ac- 
companied by steamed rolls, boiled millet, some cabbage, 
and a little roast pork. My host apologized for the simplicity 
of the fare, and I for an inordinate appetite. Which latter 
was quite beside the point, as I had to punt my chopsticks 
at a lively pace to keep up with the good fellows of the 
Poor People’s League. 

Dragon Fire assured me that An Tsai was “only a few 
steps,” and though I ^^'as uneasy about it I could do nothing 
but wait, as he insisted. When finally a youthful guide ap- 
peared, accompanied by a muleteer, it was already past four 
in the afternoon. Before leaving, I ventured to pay Mr. Liu 
for his food, but he indignantly refused. 

“You are a foreign guest,” he explained, “and you have 



THROUGH RED GATES 


37 

business with our Chairman, Mao. Moreover, your money 
is no good.” Glancing at the bill I held out to him, he asked, 
“Haven’t you any Soviet money?” When I replied in the 
negative, he counted out a dollar’s worth of Soviet paper 
notes. “Here — you will need this on the road.” 

Mr. Liu accepted a Kuomintang dollar in exchange; I 
thanked him again, and climbed up the road behind my 
guide and muleteer. 

“Well,” I said to myself as I panted up the hill, “so far, 
so good.” I had crashed the Red gates. How simple an oper- 
ation it had been! 

But ahead of me was a narrow escape and an incident 
which was later to nourish the rumour that I had been Idd- 
napped and killed by bandits. And, as a matter of fact, ban- 
dits — not Red but White — ^were already trailing me behind 
those silent walls of loess. 



PART TWO: THE ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

I 

Chased by White-bandits 

4 

with the landlords who eat our flesh!” 

“Down with the militarists who drink our blood!” 

“Down with the traitors who sell China to Japan!” 

“Welcome the United Front with all anti-Japanese 
armies!” 

“Long live the Chinese Revolution!” 

“Long live the Chinese Red Army!” 

It was under these somewhat disturbing exhortations, 
emblazoned in bold black characters, that I was destined to 
spend my first night in Red territory. \ 

But it was not in An Tsai and not under the protection 
of any Red soldiers. For, as I had feared, we did not reach 
An Tsai that day, but by sunset had arrived only at a little 
village that nestled in the curve of a river, with hills brood- 
ing darkly on every side. Several layers of slate-roofed 
houses rose up from the lip of the stream, and it was on 
their mud walls that the slogans were chalked. Fifty or sixty 
peasants and staring children poured out to greet my cara- 
van of one donkey. 

My young emissar)’^ of the Poor People’s League decided 
to deposit me here. One of his cows had recently calved, he 
said; there were wolves in the neighbourhood, and he had to 



40 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

get back to his charges. An Tsai was still ten miles distant and 
we could not get there easily in the dark. He turned me over 
for safekeeping to the chairman of the local branch of the 
Poor People’s League. Both guide and muleteer refused any 
compensation for their services — either in White money or 
Red. 

The chairman was a youth in his early twenties who 
wore a faded blue cotton jacket under a brown open face, 
and a pair of white trousers above a pair of leathery bare 
feet. He welcomed me and w;as very kind. He offered me a 
room in the village meeting-house, .and had hot water 
brought to me, and a bowl of millet. But I declined the dark, 
evil-smelling room, and petitioned for the use of tv'^o dis- 
mantled doors. Laying these on a couple of benches, I un- 
rolled my blankets and made my bed in the open. It was a 
gorgeous night, with a clear sky spangled with northern 
stars, and the waters in a little fall below me murmured of 
peace and tranquillity. Exhausted from the long walk I fell 
asleep immediately. 

When I opened my eyes again dawn was just breaking. 
The chairman was standing over me, shaking my shoulder. 
Of course I was startled and I sat up at once, fully awake. 

“What is it?” I demanded. 

“You had better leave a little early. There are bandits 
near here, and you ought to get to An Tsai quickly.” 

Bandits? It was on my tongue to reply that I had in fact 
come precisely to meet these so-called bandits, when I sud- 
denly realized what he meant. He was not talking about 
Reds, he meant “White-bandits.” I got up without further 
persuasion. I did not want anything to happen to me so ri- 
diculous as being kidnapped by White-bandits in Soviet 
China. 

The reader is entitled to some explanation. White-bandits 
were in the Kuomintang’s terminology called wln-thian, or 
“people’s corps,” just as Red-bandits were in Soviet termi- 



CHASED BY WHITE-BANDITS 4 1 

nolog)'^ called Yu-chi-tui, or “Red partisans.” In an effort to 
combat peasant uprisings, these 7nin-t’uan forces had in- 
creasingly been organized by the Kuomintang. They func- 
tioned as an organic part of the pao-chia system, an ancient 
method of controlling the peasantry which is now being 
widely imposed both by the Kuomintang in China and the 
Japanese in Manchukuo. 

Pao-chia literally means “guaranteed armour.” The sys- 
tem thus known requires that every ten peasant families must 
have a headman, through whom their respectability is es- 
tablished to the satisfaction of the local magistrate. It is a 
mutual-guarantee system, so that for any offence committed 
by one member of a pao-chia the whole or any part of the 
group can be held responsible. This was also the way the 
Mongols and Manchus ruled China as their empire. 

As a measure for preventing the organization of peasant 
opposition it is almost unbeatable. Since headmen of the pao- 
chia are nearly always rich farmers, landlords, pawnbrokers, 
or money-lenders — most zealous of subjects — it is natural 
that they are. not inclined to “guarantee” any tenant or 
debtor peasants of a rebellious turn of mind. Yet not to be 
guaranteed is a serious matter. An unguaranteed man can be 
thrown in jail on any pretext, as a “suspicious character.” 

' This means in effect that the whole peasantry is placed 
at the mercy of the gentry, who at any time can ruin a man 
by refusing to guarantee him. Now, among the functions of 
the pao-chia, and a very important one, is the collection of 
taxes for the maintenance of the min-Puan, or militia. The 
min-thian is selected, organized and commanded by the land- 
lords and gentry. Its primary duties are to fight Communism, 
to help collect rents and share-crop debts, to collect loans 
and interest, and to support the^Jocal magistrates’ efforts to 
gather in the taxes. 

Hence it happened that, when the Red Army occupied a 
territory, its first as well as its last enemy was the min-Puan. 



42 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

For the min-t'uan had no base except in the landlords who 
paid them, and of course they lost that base when the Reds 
came in. The real class-warfare of China was best seen in the 
struggles between min-thian and Red partisans, for here very 
often was a direct armed conflict between landlords and 
their former tenants and debtors. Min-t’nan mercenaries 
numbered hundreds of thousands and were most important 
auxiliaries of the some 2,000,000 nominally anti-Red troops 
of China. 

Now, although there was a truce between the Red Army 
and the Kuomintang Army on this front, attacks by the 
min-fuan on the Red partisan brigades continued intermit- 
tently. In Sian, Lochuan, and Yenan, I had heard that many 
landlords who had fled to these cities were now financing or 
personally leading the White-bandits to operate in the Soviet 
border districts. Taking advantage of the absence of the 
main Red forces, they made frequent raids into Red terri- 
tory, burning and looting villages, and killing peasants. Lead- 
ers were carried off to the "U^hite districts, where generous 
rewards were given for such Red captives by the landlords 
and White officers. 

Interested primarily in revanche and quick cash returns 
on their adventures, the min-fiutn were credited with the 
most destructive work of the Red-White wars. I, at any rate, 
had no wish to test out the White-bandits’ “foreign policy”, 
on myself. Although my belongings were few, I feared that 
the little cash and clothing I had, together with my cameras, 
would prove prizes too tempting for them to overlook, if it 
only required the erasure of a lone foreign devil to possess 
them. 

Hastily swallowing some hot tea and wheat cakes, I set 
off with another guide and muleteer contributed by the 
chairman. For an hour we followed the bed of the stream, 
occasionally passing small cave-villages, where heavv-furred 
native dogs growled menacingly at me and child sentinels 



GHA'SED BY WHITE-BANDITS 43 

came out to demand our road pass. Then we reached a 
lovely pool of still water set in a natural basin hollowed from 
great rocks, and there I saw my first Red warrior. 

He was alone except for a pretty white pony which 
stood grazing beside the stream, and wearing a vivid silky- 
blue saddle-blanket with a yellow star on it. The young man 
had been bathing, and at our approach he jumped up 
quickly, pulling on a sky-blue coat and a turban of white 
towelling, on which was fixed a red star. A Mauser hung at 
his hip, with a red tassel dangling bravely from its wooden 
combination holster-stock. With his hand on his gun he 
waited for us to come up to him, and demanded our business 
from the guide. The latter having produced his road pass, 
and briefly explained how I had been cast upon him, the 
warrior looked at me curiously for further elucidation. 

“I have come to interview iMao Tse-tung,” I offered; “I 
understand he is at An Tsai. How much farther have we 
to go?” 

“Chairman Mao?” he inquired slowly. “No, he is not at 
An Tsai.” Then he peered behind us and asked if I were 
alone. Having convinced himself that I was, his reserve 
dropped from him, he smiled as if at some secret amusement, 
and said, “I am going to An Tsai. I’ll just go along with you 
to the district government.” 

He walked his pony beside me and I volunteered more 
details about myself, and ventured some inquiries about him. 
I learned that he was in the Political Defence Bureau (Gay- 
payoo), and was on patrol duty along this frontier. And the 
horse? It was a “gift” from Young Marshal Chang Hsueh- 
liang. He told me that the Reds had captured over i,ooo 
horses from Chang’s troops in recent battles in North Shensi. 
I learned further that he was called Yao, that he was twenty- 
two years old, and that he had been a Red for six years. Six 
years! What tales he must have to tell! 

I liked him. He was an honest-looking youth, rather well 



44 road to the red capital 

made, .with a shock of glistening black hair under his red 
star. Meeting him in the lonely valley was reassuring. In fact, 
I even neglected to question him about the bandits, for we 
were soon discussing the Red Army’s spring march into 
Shansi. In return for my account of the effect it had pro- 
duced in Peking, he told me of his own experiences in that 
astonishing “Anti-Japanese Expedition,” in which the Red 
Army column had collected 1 5,000 new followers in a single 
month. 

In a couple of hours we had reached An Tsai, which lay 
opposite the Fu Ho, a sub-tributary of the Yellow River. A 
big town on the map, An Tsai turned out to be little but the 
pretty shell of its wall. The streets were completely deserted 
and ever3Thing stood in crumbling ruins. first thought 
was that these were the evidences of pillage and vandalism. 
But closer inspection showed no signs of burning and it was 
clear enough that the ruins were ancient and could not have 
been made by the Reds. 

“The town was completely destroyed over a decade ago 
b)'' a great flood,” Yao c.xplained. “The whole city went 
swimming.” 

An Tsai’s inhabitants had not rebuilt the city, but lived 
now in the face of a great stone cliff, honey-combed with 
yao-jang, a little beyond the walls. Upon arrival we discov- 
ered, however, that the Red Army detachment stationed 
there had been dispatched to chase bandits, while members 
of the district Soviet had gone to Pai Chia P’ing, a nearby 
hamlet, to render a report to a provincial commissioner. Yao 
volunteered to escort me to Pai Chia Phng — “Hundred Fam- 
ily Peace” — which we reached at dusk. 

I had already been in Soviet territory a daj’' and a half, 
yet I had seen no signs of wartime distress, had met but one 
Red soldier, and a populace that universally seemed to be 
pursuing its agrarian tasks in complete composure. Yet I was 
not to be misled by appearances. 1 remembered liow, during 


CHASED BY WHITE-BANDITS 45 

the Sino- Japanese war at Shanghai in 1932, Chinese peasants 
had gone on tilling their fields in the very midst of battle, 
with apparent unconcern. So that when, just as we rounded 
a corner to enter “Hundred Family Peace,” and I heard 
blood-curdling yells directly above me, I was not entirely 
unprepared. 

Looking towards the sound of the fierce battle-cries, I 
saw, standing on a ledge above the road, in front of a row 
of barrack-like houses, a dozen peasants brandishing spears, 
pikes and a few rifles in the most uncompromising of atti- 
tudes. It seemed that the question of my fate as a blockade- 
runnei' — whether I was to be given the firing squad as an 
imperialist, or to be welcomed as an honest inquirer — ^was 
about to be settled without further delay. 

I must have turned a comical face toward Yao, for he 
burst into laughter. ‘Tu p'aP' he chuclded. “Don’t be afraid. 
They are only some partisans — practhing. There is a Red 
partisan school here. Don’t be alarmed!” 

Later on I learned that the curriculum for partisans in- 
cludes this rehearsal of ancient Chinese v-ar-cries, just as in 
the days of feudal tourneys described in All Men Are 
Brothers. And having experienced a certain frigidity of spine 
as an unwitting subject of the technique, I can testify that 
it is still very effective in intimidating an enemy. Shouted 
during a surprise attack in the dark, when partisans prefer to 
act, these cries must be utterly terrif)dng. 

I had just sat down and begun an interview with a Soviet 
functionary to whom Yao had introduced me in Pai Chia 
P’ing, when a young commander, v/caring a Sam Brovme 
belt, stumbled up on a sweating horse, and plunged to the 
ground. He looked curiously at me. Afid it was from him 
that I heal'd the full details of mv oum adventure. 

The new arrival tvas named Pien, and he was comman- 
dant of the An Tsai Red Guard. He announced that he had 
just returned from an encounter vdth a force of about a 



^6 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

hundred inm-thian. A little peasant boy — a “Young Van- 
guard” — ^Iiad run several miles and arrived almost exhausted 
at An Tsai, to warn them that vtin-t'uan had invaded the 
district. And that their leader was a really white bandit! — 
a foreign devil — 7nyself! 

“I at once took a mounted detachment over a mountain 
short-cut, and in an hour we sighted the bandits,” Pien re- 
counted. “They were following, you” — he pointed at me — 
“only about two U. But we surrounded them, attacked in a 
ralley, and captured some, including two of their leaders, 
and several horses. The rest escaped towards the frontier.” 
As he concluded his brief report, some of his command filed 
into the courtyard, leading several of the captured mounts. 

I began to wonder if he really thought I was leading the 
min-t’ttaii. Flad I escaped from Whites — ^who, had they 
seized me in no-man’s-land, undoubtedly would have called 
me a Red — only to be captured by the Reds and accused of 
being a White.? 

But presently a slender young officer appeared, orna- 
mented with a black beard unusually heavy for a Chinese. 
He came up and addressed me in a soft, cultured voice. 
“Hello,” he said, “are you looking for somebody?” 

He had spoken in English! 

And in a moment I learned that he was Chou En-lai, the 
“notorious” Red commander, who had once been an honours 
student in a missionary school. Here my reception was 
decided. 



•4 


2 

The hisurrectionist 

4 p 

A fter I had talked for a few minutes with Chou En-lai, 

. and explained who I \vas, he arranged for me to spend 
the night in Pai Chia P’ing, and asked me to come next 
morning to his headquarters, in a nearby village. 

I sat down to dinner with a section of the Communica- 
tions Department, which was stationed here, and I met -a 
dozen young men who were billeted in Pai Chia P’ing. Some 
of them were teachers in the partisan school, one was a radio 
operator, and some were officers of the Red Army. Our 
meal consisted of boiled chicken, unleavened whole-wheat 
bread, cabbage, millet, and potatoes, of wffiich I ate heartily. 
But, as usual, there was nothing to drink but hot water and 
I could not touch it. I was famished with thirst. 

The food was served — delivered is the word — by two 
nonchalant young lads wearing uniforms several sizes too 
large for them, and peaked Red caps with long bills that 
kept flapping down over their eyes. They looked at me 
sourly at first, but after a few minutes I managed to provoke 
a friendly grin from one of them. Emboldened by this suc- 
cess, I called to him as he went past. 

“JFe/,” I demanded, “bring us some cold water.” 

The youth simply ignored me. In a few minutes I tried, 
the other one, with no better result. 



48 


ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

Then I saw that Li Ko-nung, head of the communications 
section, was laughing at me behind his thick-Iensed goggles. 
He plucked mv sleeve. “You can call him ‘little devil,’ ” he 
advised, “or you can call him comrade — but you cannot call 
him ^vei! In here everybody is a comrade. These lads are 
Young Vanguards, and they are here because they are revo- 
lutionaries and volunteer to help us. They are not servants. 
They are future Red warriors.” 

Just then the cold water did arrive. 

“Thank you,” I said apologetically, “ — comrade!” 

The Young Vanguard looked at me boldly. “Never mind 
that,” he said, “you don’t thank a comrade for a thing like 
that!” 

I had never before seen so much personal dignity in any 
Chinese youngsters. This first encounter was only the be- 
ginning of a series of surprises that the Young Vanguards 
were to give me, for as I penetrated deeper into the Soviet 
districts I was to discover in these red-cheeked “little Red 
devils” — cheerful, gay, energetic and loyal — the living spirit 
of an astonishing crusade of youth. 

It was one of those Sons of Lenin, in fact, who escorted 
me in the morning to Chou En-lai’s headquarters. That 
turned out to be a bombproof hut, surrounded by many 
others exactly like it, in which farmers dwelt undismayed by 
the fact that they were in a battle area, and that in their 
midst was the Red commander of the Eastern Front. Was it 
the secret of the Red Army’s reputed popularity with the 
peasantry, I wondered, that it was able to move into districts 
like this so unobtrusively? The quartering of a few troops in 
the vicinity did not seem to have disturbed the rustic seren- 
ity at all. 

Before the quarters of Chou En-lai, for whose head 
Chiang Kai-shek had offered $80,000, there was but one 
sentry. 

Inside I saw that the room was clean but furnished in the 



THE INSURRECTIONIST 


49 

barest fashion. A mosquito net hanging over the clay k'mig 
was the only “luxury” observable. A couple of iron dispatch- 
boxes stood at the foot of it, and a little wooden table served 
as desk. Chou was bending over this, reading radiograms, 
when the sentry announced my arrival. 

“I have a report that you are a reliable journalist, friendly 
to the Chinese people, and that you can be trusted to tell the 
truth,” said Chou. “This is all we want to know. It does not 
matter to us that you are not a Communist. We will wel- 
come any journalist who comes to see the Soviet districts. 
It is not we, but the Kuomintang, who prevent it. You can 
write about anything you see and you will be given every 
help to investigate the Soviet disu'icts.” 

I was a little surprised and a little sceptical of the sincer- 
ity of this carte blanche. I had expected, even if allowed to 
travel in the Soviet districts, that certain restrictions would 
be placed upon me concerning photography, or collecting 
notes, or holding conversations. It sounded too ideal; there 
must be a foil somewhere. . . . 

Evidently the “report” about me had come from the 
Communists’ secret headquarters in Sian. The Reds had ra- 
dio communication with all important cities of China, in- 
cluding Shanghai, Hankow, Nanking and Tientsin. Despite 
frequent seizures of Red radio sets in the White cities, the 
Kuomintang had never succeeded in breaking communica- 
tions with the Red areas for very long. According to Chou, 
the Kuomintang had never cracked the Red Army’s codes 
since they first established a radio department, with equip- 
ment captured from the White troops. 

Chou’s radio station was erected only a short distance 
from his headquarters. Through it he M'as in touch with all 
important points in the Soviet areas, and with every front. 
He even had direct communication with Commander-in- 
Chief Chu Teh, whose forces Avere then stationed hundreds 
of miles to the south-west, on the Szechuan-Tibetan border. 



50 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

There was a Red radio school in Pao An, temporary Soviet 
capital in the North-v/est, where about ninety students were 
being trained as radio engineers. They picked up the daily 
broadcasts from Nanking, Shanghai and Tokyo, and fur- 
nished news to the Press of Soviet China. 

Chou squatted before his little desk and put aside his 
radiograms — mostly reports from units stationed at various 
points along the Yellow River, opposite Shansi province, the 
Reds’ “Eastern Front.” He began working out a suggested 
itinerary for me. When he had finished he handed me a 
paper containing items covering a trip of ninety-two days.' 

“This is my recommendation,” he said, “but whether 
you follow it is your own business. I think you will find it 
an interesting journey.” 

But ninety-two days! And almost half of them to be 
spent merely in travel. What was there to be seen? Were 
the Red districts so extensive as that? I said nothing, but 
made mental reservations about the itinerary. Actually, I 
was to spend much longer than he had suggested, and in the 
end to leave with reluctance because I had seen so little. 

Chou promised me the use of a horse to carry me to Pao 
An, three days distant, and arranged for me to leave the fol- 
lowing morning, when I could accompany part of the com- 
munications corps that was returning to the provisional 
capital. I learned that A^ao Tse-tung and other Soviet func- 
tionaries were there now, and Chou agreed to send a radio 
message to them, telling of my arrival. 

During my conversation I had been studying Chou with 
deep interest, for in China, like many Red leaders, he was as 
much a legend as a man. He was of slender stature, of me- 
dium height, with a slight wiry frame, boyish in appearance 
despite his long black beard, and with large, warm, deep-set 
eyes. There was certainly a kind of magnetism about him 
that seemed to derive from a curious combination of shy- 
ness, personal charm and complete assurance of command. 



THE INSURRECTIONIST 


51 

His English was somewhat hesitant and difficult, but it was 
understandable. He told me he had not used it for five years, 

I knew something about Chou from a former schoolmate, 
and from Kuomintang men who had worked with him in 
days of the Great Revolution of 1925-1927, which is called 
the Chinese “Nationalist Revolution” by foreigners. From 
Chou En-lai I was to learn much more. He interested me 
especially for one reason. He was evidently that rarest of all 
creatures in China, a pure intellectual in whom action was 
co-ordinated with knowledge and conviction. He was a 
scholar turned insurrectionist. 

The son of a great Mandarin family, his grandfather a 
high official in the A'lanchu dynasty, his father a brilliant 
teacher, his mother extraordinary (a well-read woman who 
actually liked modern literature!), Chou En-lai himself 
seemed destined for a career as a scholar, for from early 
childhood he showed marked literary talent. But like many 
others of his generation who were educated in a period of 
national av/akening, his interest in literature was deflected. 
When, after the First Revolution (1911), China’s innocent 
“Literary Renaissance” began to germinate more serious 
growths, Chou En-lai tvas swept into the movement for 
social revolution vffiich was to shake China to the depths of 
its soul. 

He had learned English and got a “liberal” education in 
Nankai Middle School, and later in Nankai University, an 
American missionary-backed enterprise in Tientsin. An out- 
standing student of his class, during three of his years at 
Nankai he paid his way by scholarships. Then came Japan’s 
“Twenty-one Demands,” Yuan Shih-k’ai’s attempt to restore 
the Empire, the beginning of revolt tliroughout China, the 
movement for democracy and social change, and the student 
rebellion of 1919. As a student leader, Chou was arrested and 
imprisoned for a year in Tientsin. Among other young pa- 
triots jailed with him was a radical girl student of a Tientsin 



52 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

normal college — the woman who became his wife and clos- 
est comrade. . ^ 

Released, Chou went to France. Influenced by post-war 
Communism, he helped organize the Chinese Communist. 
Party in Paris, and became a founder of the organization 
simultaneously formed in China. Two years of study in 
Paris, a few months in England, to France again, and then a 
year of study in Germany. In 1924, he returned to China, 
already a well-known revolutionary organizer, and at once 
joined Sun Yat-sen at Canton, who was then preparing for 
the Nationalist Revolution, in co-operation with the Chinese 
Communist Party and with Soviet Russia. 

At twenty-six, Chou became a leading figure in the polit- 
ical life of Canton, was made secretary of famed Whampoa 
Academy, and became a confidant of General Bluecher, then 
Whampoa’s No. i Russian adviser, later commander of the 
Soviet Union’s Far Eastern Red Army. To Chiang Kai-shek, 
then president of Whampoa, the youthful Red was anath- 
ema. But Chiang was nevertheless obliged to appoint him 
chief of Whampoa Academy’s political department, because 
of Chou’s great influence with the radical cadets. 

During 1925, 1926, and 1927, the Northern Expedition 
was under way, with Chiang Kai-shek as Commander-in- 
Chief, selected jointly by the Kuomintang and the Com- 
munists. Chou En-lai was ordered to prepare an insurrection 
and help the Nationalist Army seize Shanghai. A youth of 
twenty-eight, with no formal military trailing, little expe- 
rience with the working class (from which, as son of a big 
bourgeois family, he had been isolated), with no guidebook 
to show him how to make an insurrection, and none to ad- 
vise him (the chief Russian advisers being with Chiang Kai- 
shek), Chou arrived in Shanghai equipped only with a revo- 
lutionary determination and a theoretical knowledge of 
Marxism. 

Within three months the Communist Party had organ- 



THE INSURRECTIONIST 


53 

ized 600,000 workers, and was able to call a general strike. 
Tlie response was unanimous, and a terrifying experience to 
the smug populace of this greatest stronghold of foreign im- 
perialism in China. But the insurrection failed. Unanned and 
untrained, the workers did not know how to go about “seiz- 
ing the city.” They had to learn empirically the necessity of 
an armed nucleus of workers. And the militarists accom- 
modated them. 

• Underestimating the significance of the first and then of 
a second strike, the old northern warlords merely cut off a 
number of heads, but failed to halt the labour movement. 
Chou En-lai and the famous Shanghai labour leaders, Chao 
Tse-yen, Ku Shun-chang, and Lo Yi-ming, now succeeded 
in organizing 50,000 pickets, and in the French concession 
secured premises where military training was secretly giv^en 
to 2,000 cadres. With Mausers smuggled into the city, an 
“iron band” of 300 marksmen was trained, and this was the 
only armed force these Shanghai workers had. 

On March 21, 1927, the Communists called a general 
strike which closed all the industries of Shanghai, and put 
600,000 workers, organized and militant for the first time 
in their lives, behind the barricades of revolution. They 
seized first the police stations, next the arsenal, then the gar- 
rison, and after that, victory. Five thousand workers were 
N armed, six battalions of revolutionary troops created, and 
a “citizens’ government” was proclaimed. 

It was the most remarkable cozip d'etat in modem Chi- 
nese histor)^ 

Thus it happened that Chiang Kai-shek, arriving a few 
days later at the outskirts of Shanghai, found his battle al- 
ready Avon, and M^as able to enter the Chinese city^ and 
accept power from a triumphant workers’ army. And thus 
it happened that when, 'about a month later, Chiang Kai- 

^ The foreign concessions were not, of course, attacked, the Na- 
tionalists occupying only the Chinese parts of Slianghai. 



54 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

shek staged his own Right cozip (Tetat, and the killing of 
radicals began, first on his list of condemned was this dan- 
gerous youth who had given him his victory — but who, the 
Generalissimo realized, might also take it away from him. 
And thus also began Chou En-lai’s life as a fugitive from 
the Kuomintang, and as a leader of the Third Revolution, 
the revolution that raised the Red banner in China. 

Chao Tse-yen, Ku Shun-chang, Lo Yi-ming, and Ch’en 
Yen-nien (son of-Ch’en Tu-hsiu, a founder of the Commu- 
nist Party of China, and later imprisoned at Nanking), and 
dozens more of Chou En-lai’s close co-workers in the Shang- 
hai uprising, were seized and executed. Chou estimated the 
toll of the “Shanghai massacre” at 5,000 lives. Chou En-lai 
himself was captured by Chiang Kai-shek’s Second Division, 
and General Pai Chung-hsi (later ruler of Kwangsi) issued 
an order for his execution. But the brother of the division 
commander had been Chou’s student at Whampoa, and he 
helped Chou to escape. 

The Insurrectionist fled to Wuhan and then to Nan- 
chang, where he helped organize the famous August First 
Uprising, the historical beginning of the Red Army of 
China. Next he went to Swatow, where Red workers seized 
the great seaport of South China, and under Chou En-lai 
held it for ten days against assaults from both foreign gun- 
boats and the native troops of militarists; and then on to Can- 
ton, and the organization of the famous Canton Commune, 

With the failure and defeat of the Canton Commune, 
Chou was obliged to work underground — until 1931, when 
he succeeded in “running the blockade” and entered the 
Soviet districts of Kiangsi and Fukien. There he was made 
political commissar to Chu Teh, Commander-in-Chief of 
the Red Army, of whom we shall hear much farther on. 
Later Chou became vice-chairman of the revolutionary mili- 
tary council, an office he still held when I met him. There 
had been years of exhausting struggle in the South, with 



THE INSURRECTIONIST 


55 

rifles, machine-guns, and spades pitted against squadrons of 
bombers, against tanks and armoured cars, against all the 
wealth of the great cities behind their enemy, in- a heroic 
effort to save the little Soviet republic, which lacked a sea- 
port, which lacked even salt, and had to make up for it with 
the iron in men’s wills; severe illness and narrow escapes 
from death; and then the Long A'larch to the new Red base 
in the North-west. 

Renunciation of the key philosophy of ancient China, 
the philosophy of umbrella-truces and face-saving; match- 
less capacity for punishment and hardship; selfless adherence 
to an ideology, and a tenacit)- that did not know when it was 
beaten — all these seemed implicit in this story of the Red 
Army as it was revealed to me in the story of one man who 
helped make it. Chou must be a fanatic, I told myself, and 
I looked for the fatal gleam in the retina. But if it was there 
I failed to discern it. He talked on slowly, quietly, thought- 
fully. 

Chou left me, then, with an impression of a cool, logical, 
and empirical mind. His mildly uttered statements made a 
singular contrast against the background of nine years of 
defamation of the Communists by Kuomintang propaganda 
describing them as “ignorant bandits,” “marauders,” and 
by other choice epithets. 

Somehow, as he walked with me back along the quiet 
country lane to Hundred Family Peace, through fields of 
sesame and ripe wheat and the nodding ears of corn, he did 
not seem to fit any of the well-worn descriptions of the Red- 
bandits. He seemed, on the contrary, genuinely light-hearted 
and as full of the love of life as the “little Red devil” who 
trudged manfully beside him, and around whose shoulder 
he had thrown a fatherly arm. He seemed very much like 
that youth who used to take the feminine lead in the college 
plays at Nankai — because in those days Chou was handsome 
and had a figure willovy as a girl’s. 



Something about Ho Lung 


N ext morning at six I set out with a squatl of about 
forty youths of the communications corps, who were 
escorting a caravan of goods to Pao An. 

I found that only myself, Fu Chin-kuei, an emissary from 
the Waichiaopu — the Reds’ own “Foreign Office” — and Li 
Chiang-lin, a Red commander, were mounted. It may not be 
precisely the word: Fu had a privileged perch on a stout but 
already iieavily laden mule; Li Chiang-lin rode an equally 
over-burdened ass; and I was vaguely astride the lone' horse, 
which at times I could not be quite sure was really there at 
all. 

My animal had a quarter-moon back and a camel-gait. 
His enfeebled legs wobbled so that I expected him at any 
moment to buckle up and breathe his last. He was especially 
disconcerting as we crept along the narrow trails hewn from 
steep cliffs that rose up from the river bed we followed. It 
seemed to me that any sudden shift of my weight over his 
sunken flanks would send us both hurtling to the rocky 
gorge below. 

Li Chiang-lin laughed doMm from his pyramid of lug- 
gage at my discomfiture. “That’s a fine saddle you are sitting, 
fimg-chib^ but what is that underneath it?” 

^ "Comrade.” 

56 



SOMETHING ABOUT HO LUNG 57 

It was not my role to complain, for who was I to be 
riding, anyway; but at this gibe I could not resist comment- 
ing: “Just tell me this, Li Chiang-lin, how can you fight on 
dogs like these? Is this how you mount your Red cavalry?” 

‘Tu-shib! No, you will see! Is your steed hiiai-la? Well, 
it’s just because we kave bad ones like this at the rear that 
our cavalry is unbeatable at the front! If there is a horse that 
is fat and can run, not even Mao Tse-tung can keep him 
from the front! Only the worn-out dogs we use in our rear. 
And that’s how it is with everything: guns, food, clothing, 
horses, mules, camels, sheep — the best go to our Red fight- 
ers! If it’s a horse you Avant, ftmg-chih, go to the front!” 

I determined to follow his advice as soon as I could. 

“But Li Chiang-lin, how is it you yourself are not at the 
front? Are you hiiai-la^ also?” 

“Huai-Ia, me? Never! But it’s easier to spare a good man 
from the front than a good horse!” 

And Commander Li was a good man, a good Bolshevik 
and a good story-teller. He had been a Red for ten years, 
and was a veteran of the famous Nanchang Uprising of 1927, 
when Communism first became an independent force in 
China. As I rode, v^alked, panted and thirsted up and down 
the broken hills of Shensi beside Commander Li, he re- 
counted incidents and anecdotes one after another, and 
sometimes, Avhen pressed again and again, even stooped to 
talk about himself. 

He w'as still a young man, about thirty-one or thirty-two, 
and yet as he gradually unfolded his story you might think 
that he had already lived and died a dozen times. With him 
I began to discover a peculiar quality that I Avas to encoun- 
ter repeatedly in this strange iron brotherhood of Chinese 
reA'^olutionaries. Sometlung that seemed to make CA^ery man’s 
suffering and triumph the collectiA'^e burden or joy of all, 
some force that levelled out individuals, lost them, made 


^ “Broken” or “useless.” 



58 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

them really forget their own identity and yet find it some- 
how in the kind of fierce freedom and rigour and hardship 
they shared with others. ^ 

Well, it was improbable, this thing, if you knew China! 
Yet it was a fact, and later on I shall try to explain why. 

Li Chiang-Iin was a Hunanese and he was a middle-school 
student when the Great Revolution beijan. He entered the 
Kuomintang, and remained in it until the coup d'etat of 
1927, after which he joined the Reds. In Hongkong he 
wox'ked as a labour organizer for a while, under Teng Fa. 
Later on he entered the Soviet districts in Kiangsi, and be- 
came a partisan leader. In 1925, he was sent by the Kuo- 
mintang with a propaganda committee, on most responsible 
work. It was their duty to see the bandit leader, Ho Lung — 
later to be known in the Kuomintang Press as the “notori- 
ous” Ho Lung, but then a leader whose adherence was much' 
valued. Li Chiang-Iin was delegated with his committee to 
win Ho Lung to the Kuomintang Nationalist cause. 

“Ho Lung’s men were not bandits, even then,” Li told 
me, as we sat resting one day beneath some trees that stood 
beside a cool stream. “His father had been a leader in the 
Ke Lao Hui,^ and Ho Lung inherited his prestige, so that 
he became famous throughout Flunan when still a young 
man. Many stories are told by the Hunanese of his bravery 
as a youth. 

“His father was a military officer in the Ch’ing dynasty, 
and one day he was invited to a dinner by his fellow officers. 
He took his son. Ho Lung, with him. His father was boast- 
ing of Ho Lung’s fearlessness, and one of the guests decided 
to test it out. He fired off a gun under the table. They say 
that Ho Lung did not even blink! 

“When we met him he had already been commissioned 
in the provincial army. He then controlled a territory 

^ The “Elder Brother Society,” a big secret organization with 
branches throughout rural China. 



SOMETHING ABOUT HO LUNG 59 

through which rich opium caravans had to pass from Yun- 
nan to Hankow,, and he lived by taxing them, and did not 
rob the people. His followers did not rape nor carouse, like 
the troops of many warlord anuies, and he did not let them 
smoke opium. They kept their rifles clean. But it was the 
custom there to offer opium to guests. Ho Lung himself did 
not smoke, but when we arrived he had opium pipes and 
opium brought to the Mang, and over these we talked about 
revolution! 

“The head of our propaganda committee was Chou Yi- 
chung, a Communist, who had some family connection Muth 
Ho Lung. We talked to him for three weeks. Ho Lung had 
not had much education, except in military affairs, but he 
was not an ignorant man. He quickly understood the mean- 
ing of the revolution, but he carefully deliberated, and con- 
sulted with his troops, before he at last agreed to join the 
Kuomintang. 

“We established a party training school in his army, with 
Chou Yi-sunsr — ^^vho was later killed — as leader. Although it 
was a Kuomintang Nationalist training school, most of the 
propagandists were Communists. Many students entered the 
school and later became political leaders. Besides Ho Lung’s 
army, the school furnished political commissioners for the 
Third Division, under Yuan Tso-ming, who was then com- 
mander of the left-route army. Yuan Tso-ming \vas assassi- 
nated by agents of T’ang Sheng-chih, and the Third Di- 
vision was given to Ho Lung. His enlarged command M^as 
called the 20th Army, which, became part of the main 
Fourth Group Army, under the Leftist Kuomintang general, 
Chang Fa-kuei.” 

Li Chiang-lin said that Ho Lung did not join the Com- 
munist Party until after the August First Uprising at Nan- 
chang in 1927. Until a short time before that he had re-' 
mained loyal to the Wuhan (Kuomintang) Government of 
Wang Chiang-wei. But when T’ang Sheng-chih, Ho Chien • 



6o ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

and others suppressed the anti-landlord movement and be- 
gan the infamous “peasant massacre,” in which Kuomintang 
militarists executed not only Communists but thousands of 
peasant union leaders, workers and students. Ho Lung 
turned decisively Red. He was from a lowly peasant family 
himself, his sympathies were entirely with the poor, and the 
slaughter enraged him. 

Ho Chien, later on Nanking’s governor of Hunan, was 
“the most brutal and savage of all the counter-revolutionary 
generals,” according to Li. “I do not know how many peo- 
ple he killed — certainly tens of thousands. I know that in my 
own district, Liu-yang hsie?! in Hunan, he killed more than 

20.000 peasants, students and workers between April and 
June, 1927. I was there. I know. He is said to have killed 

15.000 in his own hsien, Liling.” 

I wondered how Li himself had escaped, and I asked him. 
He pulled off his blue cotton jacket — he wore nothing be- 
neatli it — and pointed to a long, jagged scar. “You see I 
didn’t — not entirely,” he laughed. 

“What happened to Ho Lung after Nanchang?” 

“His forces were defeated. He and Chu Teh moved next 
to Swatow. They were defeated again. The remnant of his 
irmy went into the interior, but Ho Lung escaped to Hong- 
Icong. Later he smuggled himself to Shanghai, and then, dis- 
guised, he returned to Hunan. 

“It is said of Ho Lung that he established a Soviet dis- 
trict in Hunan with one knife. This was early jin 1928. Ho 
Lung was in hiding in a village, plotting with members of 
the Ke Lao Hui, when some Kuomintang tax-collectors ar- 
rived. Leading a few villagers, he attacked the tax-collectors 
and killed them with his own knife, and then disarmed the 
tax-collectors’ guard. From this adventure he got enough 
revolvers and rifles to arm his first peasants’ army.” 

Ho Lung’s fame in the “Elder Brother Society” extends 
over all China. The Reds say that he can go unarmed into 



SOMETHING ABOUT HO LUNG 6 1 

any village of the country, announce himself to the Ke Lao 
Hui, and form an army. The society’s special ritual and 
language are quite difficult to master, but Ho Lung has the 
highest degrees and is said to have more than once enlisted 
an entire Ke Lao Hui branch in the Red Army. His elo- 
quence as a speaker is well known in the Kuomintang. Li 
said that when he spoke he could “raise the dead to fight.” 

When Ho Lung’s Second Front Red Army finally with- 
drew from the Hunan Soviet districts, in 1935, its rifles were 
reported to number more than 40,000, arid this army under- 
went even greater hardships in its own Long March to the 
North-west than the main forces from KJangsi. Thousands 
died on the snow mountains, and thousands more starved to 
death or were killed by Nanking bombs. Yet so great was 
Ho Lung’s personal magnetism, and his influence through- 
out rural China, that many of his men stayed vdth him and 
died on the road, rather than desert, and thousands of poor 
men along the route of march joined in to help fill up the 
dvdndling ranks. In the end he reached eastern Tibet, where 
he finally connected with Chu Teh, vrith about 20,000 men 
— most of them barefoot, half-starv^ed, and physically ex- 
hausted. After several months of recuperation, these troops 
M^ere now on the march again, into Kansu, where they were 
expected to arrive in a few weeks. 

, “What does Ho Lung look like?” I asked Li. 

“He is a big man, and strong as a tiger. Although he is 
now over fifty, he is still in excellent health. He never gets 
tired. They say he carried many of his wounded men on the 
march. Even vdien he was a Kuomintang general he lived 
as simply as his men. He cares nothing about personal pos- 
sessions — except horses. He loves horses. Once he had a 
I beautiful horse that he liked vcrj’- much. It was captured by 
some enemy troops. Ho Lung went to battle to recover that 
horse. He got it back! 

“Although he is impetuous. Ho Lung is very humble. 



62 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

i 

Since he joined the Communists he has been faithful to the 
Party, and has never broken Party discipline. He always asks 
for criticism and listens carefully to advice. His sister is 
much like him — a big woman, with large feet. She has led 
Red troops in battle herself — and carried wounded men on 
her back. So has Ho Lung’s wife.” 

Ho Lung’s hatred of the rich has become legendary in 
China — a record which seems to trace back chiefly to the 
days when his Red partisans were first forming, and the 
Hunan Soviets had not yet been placed under full control of 
the Communist Party. Many peasants who had lost friends 
or relatives during Ho Chien’s “peasant massacre,” or who 
had been beaten or oppressed by the landlords after the re- 
action had regained full power under Ho Chien, joined Ho 
Lung in a spirit of fierce vengeance. It is said that landlords 
and gentry used, to flee without further ado, even from 
places well guarded by Nanking troops, if Ho Lung was re- 
ported as far away as 200 li — for he was famous for the 
swiftness of his movements. 

Once Ho Lung arrested a Swiss missionary named Boss- 
hard, and a military court “sentenced” him to eighteen 
months’ imprisonment for alleged espionage — probably no 
more than passing on information about Red movements to 
the Kuomintang authorities, a practice of many missionaries. 
The Rev. Bosshard’s sentence had still not been completed 
when Ho Lung began the Long March, but he was ordered 
to move with the army. He was finally released during the 
march, when his sentence expired, and was given travelling 
expenses to Yunnanfu. Rather to most people’s surprise, the 
Rev. Bosshard brT)ught out few harsh words about Ho Lung. 
On the contrary, he is reported to have remarked, “If the 
peasants knew what the Communists were like, none of 
them would run away.”^ , 

Related to me by Dr. Joseph F. Rock, who talked to the Rev. 
Bosshard when he arrived in Yunnanfu. 



RED COMPANIONS 63 

It was the noon halt, and we decided to bathe in the cool, 
inviting stream. We got in and lay on a long, flat rock, while 
the shallow water rippled over us in cool sheets. Some peas- 
ants went past, driving a big cloud of sheep before them; 
overhead the sky was clear and blue. There was nothing but 
peace and beauty here, and it was that odd midday moment 
when the world for centuries has been like this, with only 
peace, beauty and contentment. 

Suddenly I asked Li Chiang-lin if he was married. 

“I was,” he said slowly. “My wife was killed in the 
South, by the Kuomintang.” 

I began to understand a little bit why the Chinese Com- 
munists have fought so long, so uncompromisingly, so un- 
Chinese-like. And as I trudged on for many more miles I 
was to learn still more about that from other Red com- 
panions. 



4 . 

Red Covipamovs 

N 'ORTH SHENSI was one of the poorest parts of China 
I had seen, not excluding western Yunnan. There was 
no real land scarcity, but there was in many places a serious 
scarcity of real land — at least real farming land. Here in 
Shensi a peasant may own ■as much as 100 DWii ^ of land and 
yet be a poor man. A landlord in this country has to possess 
at least several hundred moit of land, and even on a Chinese 
scale he cannot be considered rich unless his holdings arc 
^ One Chinese inou is about a sLxth of an English acre. 



64 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

part of the limited and fertile valley land, where rice and 
other valued crops can be grown. 

The farms of Shensi may be described as slanting, and 
many of them also as slipping, for landslides are frequent. 
The fields are mostly patches laid on the serried landscape, 
between crevices and small streams. The land seems rich 
enough in many places, but the crops grown are strictly 
limited by the steep gradients, both in quantity and quality. 
There are few genuine mountains, only endless broken hills, 
hills as interminable as a sentence by James Joyce, and even 
more tiresome. Yet the..effect is often strikingly like Picasso, 
the sharp-angled shadowing and colouring changing mirac- 
ulously with the sun’s wheel, and towards dusk it becomes 
a magnificent sea of purpled hilltops with dark velvety folds 
running down, like the pleats on a mandarin skirt, to ravines 
that seem bottomless.. 

After the first day I rode little, not so much out of pity 
for the languishing nag, but because everyone else marched. 
Li Chiang-lin was the oldest warrior of the company. Most 
of the others were lads in their teens, hardly more than chil- 
dren. One of these was nicknamed “Lao Kou,” the Old Dog, 
and v^alking with him I asked why he had joined the Reds. 

He was a southerner and had come all the way from the 
Fukien Soviet districts, on the Red Army’s six-thousand-mile 
expedition which foreign military experts refused to believe 
possible. Yet here was Old Dog, seventeen years old, and 
actually looking fourteen. He had made that march and 
thought nothing of it. He said that he was prepared to walk 
another 25,000 li if the Red Army did. 

With him was a lad nicknamed Local Cousin, and he had 
walked, almost as far, from Kiangsi. Local Cousin was six- 
teen. 

Did they like the Red Army? I asked. They looked at 
me in genuine amazement. It had evidently never occurred 
to either of them that anyone could not like the Red Army. 



RED COMPANIONS 


65 

. “The Red Army has taught me to read and to write,” 
said Old Dog. “Here I have learned to operate a radio, and 
how to aim a rifle straight. The Red Amrj* helps the poor.” 

“Is that all?” 

“It is good to us and we are never beaten,” added Local 
Cousin. “Here everj’^body is the same. It is not like the 
White districts, where poor people are slaves of the land- 
lords and the Kuomintang. Here everj’^body fights to help 
the poor, and to save China. The Red Army fights the land- 
lords and the White-bandits and the Red Army is anti- 
Japanese. Why should anyone not like such an army as 
this? ” 

There was a peasant lad who had joined the Reds in 
Szechuan, and I asked him why he had done so. He told me 
that his parents were poor farmers, with only four mou of 
land (less than an acre), which wasn’t enough to feed him 
and his two sisters. When the Reds came to his village, he 
said, all the peasants welcomed them, brought them hot tea 
and made stveets for them. The Red dramatists gave plays. 
It was a happy time. Only the landlords ran. When the land 
was re-distributed his parents received their share. So they 
were not sorry, but vei}^ glad, when he joined the poor 
people’s army. 

Another youth, about nineteen, had formerly been an 
ironsmith’s apprentice in Hunan, and he was nicknamed 
“T’ieh Lao-hu,” the Iron Tiger. The Reds arrived in his 
district, and he dropped bellows, pans and apprenticeship, 
and, clad only in a pair of sandals and trousers, he hurried 
off to enlist. Why? Because he wanted to fight the masters 
who starv’^ed their apprentices, and to fight the landlords 
who robbed his parents. He was fighting for the revolution, 
which would free the poor. The Red Army was good to 
people and did not rob them and beat them like the 'WTiite 
armies. He pulled up his trouser leg and displayed a long 
white scar, his souvenir of battle. 



66 ROAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 

There was another youth from Fukien, one from Che- 
kiang, several more from Kiangsi and Szechuan, but the ma- 
jority were natives of Shensi and Kansu. Some had “gradu- 
ated” from the Young Vanguards, and (though they looked 
like infants) had already been Reds for years. Some had 
joined the Red Army to fight Japan, two had enlisted to 
escape from slavery, three had deserted from ‘the Kuomin- 
vang troops, but most of them had joined “because the Red 
Army was a revolutionary army, fighting landlords and im- 
perialism.” 

Then I talked to a squad commander, who was an “older” 
man, of twenty-four. He had been in the Red Army since 
1931. In that year his father and mother were killed by a 
Nanking bomber, which also destroyed his house, in Ki- 
angsi. When he had gone home from the fields and found 
both his parents dead he had at once thrown down his hoe, 
bade his wife good-bye, and enlisted with the Communists. 
One of his brothers, a Red partisan, was killed in Kiangsi 
in 1935. 

They were a heterogeneous lot, but more truly “na- 
tional” in composition than ordinary Chinese armies, usually 
carefully segregated according to provinces. Tlieir different 
provincial backgrounds and dialects did not seem to divide 
them, but became the subject of constant good-natured 
raillery. I never saw a serious quarrel among them. In fact, 
during all my travel in the Red districts, I was not to see a 
single fist-fight between Red soldiers, and among young 
men I thought that remarkable. 

Though tragedy had touched the lives of nearly all of 
them, they were perhaps too young for it to have depressed 
them much. They seemed to me fairly happy, and perhaps 
the first consciously happy group of Chinese proletarians I 
had seen. Passive contentment is the common phenomenon 
in China, but the higher emotion of happiness, which implies 
a feeling of positiveness about existence, is rare indeed. 



RED COMPANIONS 


67 

They sang nearly all day on the road, and their supply 
of sonos was endless. Their sinsinsf was not done at a com- 
mand, but was spontaneous, and they sang well. Whenever 
the spirit moved him, or he thought of an appropriate song, 
one of them would suddenly burst forth, and commanders 
and men joined in. They sang at night, too, and learned new 
folk-tunes from the peasants, who brought out their Shensi 
guitars. 

What discipline they had seemed almost entirely self- 
imposed. When we passed wild apricot trees on the hills 
there was an abrupt dispersal until everyone had filled his 
pockets, and somebody always brought me back a handful. 
Then, leaving the trees looking as if a great wind had struck 
through them, they moved back into order and quick-timed 
to make up for the loss. But, when we passed private or- 
chards, nobody touched the fruit in them, and the grain and 
vegetables we consumed in the villages were paid for in full. 

As far as I could see, the peasants bore no resentment to- 
wards my Red companions. Some seemed on close terms of 
friendship, and very loyal — a fact probably not unconnected 
with a recent redivision of land and the abolition of taxes. 
They freely offered for sale what edibles they had, and ac- 
cepted Soviet money without hesitation. When we reached 
a village at noon or sunset the chairman of the local Soviet 
promptly provided quarters, and designated ovens for our 
use. I frequently saw peasant women or their daughters 
volunteer to pull the bellows of the fire of our ovens, and 
laugh and joke with the Red warriors, in a very emancipated 
way for Chinese women — especially Shensi women. 

On the last day, we stopped for lunch at a village in a 
green valley, and here all the children came round to ex- 
amine the first foreign devil many of them had seen. I de- 
cided to catechize them. 

“What is a Communist?” I asked. 

“He is a citizen who helps the ' Red Army fight the 



RDAD TO THE RED CAPITAL 


68 

White-bandits and the Japanese,” one youngster of nine or 
ten piped up. 

“What else.>” 

“He helps fight the landlords and the capitalists!” 

“But what is a capitalist?” That silenced one child, but 
another came forward: “A capitalist is a man who does not 
Work, but makes others work for him.” Over-simplification, 
perhaps, but I went on: 

“Are there any landlords or capitalists here?” 

“No!” they all shrieked together. “They’ve all run 
away!” 

“Run away? From what?” 

“From our Red Army!” 

“Our” army, a peasant child talking about “his” army? 
Well, obviously it wasn’t China, but, if not, what was it? 
I decided it was incredible. Who could have taught them 
all this? 

Later on I was to discover who it was, when I examined 
the text-books of Red China, and met old Santa-Claus Hsu 
Teh-lih, once president of a normal college in Hunan, now 
Soviet Commissioner of Education. 

I was to meet him, in fact, that very afternoon, when our 
little caravan stepped down the last mountainside into the 
provisional capital of Red China. 



PART THREE: 


— 4If= 

IN “defended peace” 

I 


Soviet Strong Man 

4 > ^ 

S MALL villages are numerous in the North-west, but 
towns of any size are infrequent. Except for the in- 
dustries begun by the Reds it is completely agrarian and in 
places a semi-pastoral countt)'. Thus it was quite breath- 
taking to ride out suddenly on the brow of the wrinkled 
hills and see stretched out below me in a green valley the 
ancient walls of Pao An, which means “Defended Peace.”^ 
Pao An was once a frontier stronghold, during the T’ang 
and Kin dynasties, against the nomadic invaders to the 
north. Remains of its fortifications, flame-struck in that af- 
ternoon sun, could be seen flanking the narrow pass through 
which once emptied into this valley the conquering legions 
of the Mongols. There is an inner cit}^ still, where the gar- 
risons were once quartered; and a high defensive masonry, 
lately improved by the Reds, embraces about a square mile 
in which the present town is located. 

Here at last I found the Red leader whom Nanldng had 
been fighting for ten years — Mao Tse-tung, chairman of 
the “Chinese People’s Soviet Republic,” to employ the of- 
ficial title which had recently been adopted. The old cogno- 

^In December, 1936, the Reds occupied Yenan (Fushih), north 
Shensi, and the capital was transferred there. 

69 



70 in' “defended peace” 

men, “Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Soviet Republic” was 
dropped when the Reds-'began their new policy of struggle 
for a “United Front.” 

. Chou En-lai’s radiogram had been received, and I was 
expected. A room was provided for me in the “Foreign 
Office,” and I became temporarily a guest of the Soviet 
State. My arrival resulted in a phenomenal increase of the 
foreign population of Pao An. The other Occidental resi- 
dent was a German known as Li Teh T’ung-chih — the 
“Virtuous Comrade Li.” Of Li Teh, a former high officer 
in the German Army, and the only foreign military adviser 
ever with the Red Army, more later. 

I met Mao soon after my arrival; a gaunt, rather Lin- 
colnesque figure, above average height for a Chinese, some- 
what stooped, with a head of thick black hair grown very 
long, and with large, searching eyes, a high-bridged nose 
and prominent cheekbones. My fleeting impression was of 
an intellectual face of great shrewdness, but I had no op- 
portunity to verify this for several days. Next time I saw 
him, Mao was walking hatless along the street at dusk, talk- 
ing with two young peasants, and gesticulating earnestly. 
I did not recognize him until he was pointed out to me — 
moving along unconcernedly with the rest of the strollers, 
despite the $250,000 which Nanking had hung over his 
head. 

I could write a book about Mao Tse-tung alone. I 
talked with him many nights, on a wide range of subjects, 
and I heard dozens of stories about him from soldiers and 
Communists. My written interviews with him total about 
ttventy thousand words. He told me of his childhood and 
youth, how he became a leader in the Kuomintang and the 
Nationalist Revolution, why he became a Communist, and 
how the Red Army grew. He described the Long March to 
the North-west and wrote a classical poem about it for 
me. He told me stories of many other famous Reds, from 



SOVIET STRONG MAN 


71 

Chu Teh down to the youth who carried on his shoulders 
for over 6,000 miles the two iron dispatch-boxes that held 
the archives of the Soviet Government. 

How can I select, from all the wpalth of unexploited, 
unknown material, a few hundred words to tell you about 
this peasant-born intellectual turned revolutionary^? I do 
not propose to attempt' any such condensation. The story 
of Mao’s life is a rich cross-section of a whole generation, 
an important guide to understanding the sources of action 
in China, and farther on I shall include that full exciting 
recoi'd of personal history, just as he told it to me. But here 
I want to try to convey some subjective impressions, and a 
few facts of interest about him. 

Do not suppose, first of all, that iVIao Tse-tung could be 
the “saviour'” of China. Nonsense. There will never be any 
one “saviour” of China. Yet undeniably you feel a certain 
force of destiny in him. It is nothing quick or flashy, but a 
kind of solid elemental vitality. You feel that whatever there 
is extraordinary in this man grows out of the uncanny 
degree to which he synthesizes and expresses the urgent 
demands of millions of Chinese, and .especially the peasantry 
— those impoverished, underfed, exploited, illiterate, but 
kind, generous, courageous and just now rather rebellious 
human beings who are the vast majority of the Chinese 
people. If these demands and the movement which is press- 
ing them forward are the dynamics which can regenerate 
China, then in this deeply historical sense Mao TTse-tung 
may possibly become a very great man. 

But I do not intend to pronounce the verdicts of history. 
Meanwhile, Mao is of interest as a personality, apart from 
his political life, because, although his name is as familiar 
to many Chinese as that of Chiang Kai-shek, very little was 
known about him. and all sorts of strange legends existed 
about him. I was the first foreign newspaperman to inter- 
view him. 



72 IN “defended peace” 

Mao has the reputation of a charmed life. He has been 
repeatedly pronounced dead by his enemies, only to return 
to the news columns a few days later, as active as ever. The 
Kuomintang has also officially “killed” and buried Chu Teh 
many times, assisted by occasional ^ corroborations from 
clairvoyant missionaries. Numerous deaths of the two fa- 
mous men, nevertheless, did not prevent them from being 
involved in many spectacular exploits, including the Long 
March. Mao was indeed in one of his periods of newspaper 
demise when I visited Red China, but I found him quite 
substantially alive. There seems to be some basis for the 
legend of his charmed life, however, in the fact that, al- 
though he has been in scores of battles, was once captured 
by enemy troops and escaped, and has had the world’s high- 
est reward on his head, during all these years he has never 
once been wounded. 

I happened to be in his house one evening when he was 
given a complete physical examination by a Red surgeon — 
a returned student from Europe who knew his business — 
and pronounced in excellent health. He has never had tu- 
berculosis or any “incurable disease,” as has been rumoured 
by some romantic travellers.^ His lungs are completely 
sound, although, unlike most Red commanders, he is an 
inordinate cigarette-smoker. During the Long March, Mao 
and Li Teh (another heavy smoker) carried on original 
botanical research by testing out various kinds of leaves as 
tobacco substitutes. 

Ho Tze-nien, Mao’s second wife, a former school- 
teacher and a Communist organizer herself, had been less 
fortunate than her husband. She had more than a dozen 
wounds, caused by splinters from an air bomb, but all of 
them were superficial. Just before I left Pao Aruthe Maos 
were proud parents of a new baby girl. He had two other 

^ Air. Peter Fleming, in One's Company, seems to have given 
widest currency to tliis falsehood. 



, SOVIET STRONG MAN 73 

children by his former wife, Yang Kai-hui, the daughter 
of a noted Chinese professor. She was killed by Ho Chien 
several years ago. 

Mao Tse-tung was forty-three years old when I met 
him in 1936. He was elected chairman of the provisional 
Central Soviet Government at the Second All-China Soviet 
Congress, attended by delegates representing approximately 

9.000. 000 people then living under Red laws.^ Here, inci- 
dentally, it may be inserted that Mao Tse-tung estimated 
the maximum population of the various districts under the 
direct control of the Soviet Central Government, in 1934, 
as follows: Kiangsi Soviet, 3,000,000; Hupeh-Anhui-Honan 
Soviet, 2,000,000; Hunan-Kiangsi-Hupeh Soviet, 1,000,000; 
Kiangsi-Hunan Soviet, 1,000,000; Chekiang-Fukien Soviet, 

1.000. 000; Hunan-Hupeh Soviet, 1,000,000; total, 9,000,000. 
Fantastic estimates ranging as high as ten times that figure 
were evidently achieved by adding up the entire population 
in every area in which the Red Army or Red partisans had 
been reported as operating. A 4 ao laughed when ][ quoted 
him the figure of “80,000,000” people living under the 
Chinese Soviets, and said that when they had that big an 
area the revolution would be practically won. But of course 
there were many millions in areas held by Red partisans. 

The influence of Mao Tse-tung throughout the Com- 
munist world of China today is probably greater than that 
of anyone else. He is a member of nearly everything — the 
revolutionary military committee, the political bureau of 
the Central Committee, the finance commission, the organi- 
;zation committee, the public health commission, and others. 
His real influence is asserted through his domination of the 

^ Cf. Ftnidamental Laws of the Chinese Soviet Republic (Martin 
Lawrence, London, 1934). It contains the provisional constitution of 
the Soviets, and a statement of basic objectives during the “bourgeois- 
democratic” phase of the revolution. Cf. also. Red China: Mao Tse- 
.tung Reports on the Progress of the Chinese Soviet Republic (Lon- 
■don, 1934). 



IN “defended peace” 

political bureau, which has decisive power in the policies 
of the Party, the Government and the Army. Yet, while 
ever)mne knew and respected him, there was — as yet, at 
least — no ritual of hero-worship built up around him. I 
never met a Chinese Red who drooled “our-great-leader” 
phrases, I did not hear Mao’s name used as a synonym for 
the Chinese people, but still I never met one who did not 
like “the Chairman” — as everyone called him — and admire 
him. The role of his personality in the movement, was 
clearly immense. 

Mao seemed to me a very interesting and complex man. 
He had the simplicity and naturalness of the Chinese 
peasant, with a lively sense of humour and a love of rustic 
laughter. His laughter was even active on the subject of 
himself and the shortcomings of the Soviets — a boyish sort 
of laughter which never in the least shook his inner faith 
in his purpose. He is plain-speaking and plain-living, and 
some people might think him rather coarse and vulgar. Yet 
he combines curious qualities of naivete with the most in- 
cisive \vit and worldly sophistication. 

I think my first impression — dominantly one of native 
shrewdness — was probably correct. And yet Mao is an ac- 
complished scholar of Classical Chinese, an omnivorous 
readei', a deep student of philosophy and history, a good 
speaker, a man with an unusual memory and extraordinary 
powers of concentration, an able writer, careless in his per- 
sonal habits and appearance but astonishingly meticulous 
about details of duty, .a man of tireless energ)'", and a mili- 
tary and political strategist of considerable genius. It is an 
interesting fact that many Japanese regard him as the ablest 
Chinese strategist alive. 

The Reds were putting up some new buildings in Pao 
An, but accommodations were very primitive while I was- 
there. Mao lived with his wife in a two-roomed yao-fang 
with bare, poor, map-covered walls. He had known much. 



SOV'IET STRONG MAN 75 

worse, and as the son of a “rich” peasant in Hunan he had 
also known better. The chief luxury they boasted was a 
mosquito net. Otherwise Mao lived very much like the rank 
and file of the Red Army. After ten years of leadership of 
the Reds, after hundreds of confiscations of property of 
landlords, officials and tax-collectors, he owned only his 
blankets, and a few personal belongings, including nvo cot- 
ton uniforms. Although he was a Red Army commander as 
well as chairman, he wore on his coat collar only the two 
red bars that are the insignia of the ordinary Red soldier. 

I went with Mao several times to mass meetings of the 
villagers and the Red cadets, and to the Red theatre. He sat 
inconspicuously in the midst of the crowd and enjoyed 
himself hugely. I remember once, between acts at the Anti- 
Japanese Theatre, there was a general demand for a duet by 
Mao Tse-tung and Lin Piao, the twenty-eight-year-old 
president of the Red Academy, and formerly a famed 
young cadet on Chiang Kai-shek’s staff. Lin blushed like a 
schoolboy, and got them out of the “command perform- 
ance” by R' graceful speech, calling upon the women Com- 
munists for a song instead. 

Mao’s food was the same as everybody’s, but being a 
Hunanese he had the southerner’s ai-la, or “love of pepper.” 
He even had pepper cooked into his bread. Except for this 
passion, he scarcely seemed to notice what he ate. One 
night at dinner I heard him expand on a theory of pepper- 
loving peoples being revolutionaries. He first submitted his 
ovm province, Hunan, famous for the revolutionaries it has 
produced. Then he listed Spain, Mexico, Russia and France 
to support his contention, but laughingly had to admit de- 
feat when somebod)?^ mentioned the well-known Italian love 
of red pepper and garlic, in refutation of his theory. One 
of the most amusing songs of the “bandits,” incidentally, is 
a ditty called “The Hot Red Pepper.” Jt tells of the disgust 
of the pepper with his pointless vegetable existence, waiting 



76 IN “defended peace” 

to be eaten, and how he ridicules the contentment of the 
cabbages, spinach and beans with their invertebrate careers.' 
He ends up by leading a vegetable insurrection. “The Hot 
Red Pepper” was a great favorite with Chairman Mao. 

He appears to be quite free from symptoms of megalo- 
mania, but he has a deep sense of personal dignity, and 
something about him suggests a power of ruthless decision 
when he deems it necessary. I never saw him angry, but I 
heard from others that on occasions he has been roused to 
an intense and withering fury. At such times his command 
of irony and invective is said to be classic and lethal. 

I found him surprisingly well-informed on current 
world politics. Even on the Long March, it seems, the Reds 
received news broadcasts by radio, and in the North-west 
they published their own newspapers. Mao is exceptionally 
well-read in world history and has a realistic conception of 
European social and political conditions. He was very in- 
terested in the Labour Party of England, and questioned me 
intensely about its present policies, soon exhausting all my 
information. It seemed to me that he found it difficult fully 
to understand why, in a country where workers are en- 
franchised, there is still no workers’ government. I am 
afraid my answers did not satisfy him. He expressed pro- 
found contempt for Ramsay MacDonald, whom he desig- 
nated as a han-chien — an arch-traitor of the British people. 

His opinion of President Roosevelt was rather interest- 
ing. He believed him to be anti-Fascist, and thought China 
could co-operate with such a man. He asked innumerable 
questions about the New Deal, and Roosevelt’s foreign pol- 
icy. The questioning showed a remarkably clear conception 
of the objectives of both. He regarded Mussolini and Hitler 
as mountebanks, but considered Mussolini intellectually -a 
much abler man, a real Machiavellian, with a knowledge of 
history, while Hitler was a mere will-less puppet of the 
reactionary capitalists.- 



SOVIET STRONG MAN 77 

Mao had read a number of books about India and had 
some definite opinions on that country. Chief among these 
was that Indian independence would never be 'realized 
without an agrarian revolution. He questioned me about 
Gandhi, Jawarhalal Nehru, Suhasini Chattopadhyaya, and 
other Indian leaders I had known. He 'knew something 
about the Negro question in America, and unfavourably 
compared the treatment of Negroes and American Indians 
with policies in the Soviet Union towards national minor- 
ities. However, he was also interested when I pointed out 
certain great differences in the historical and psychological 
background of the Negro in America and that of the minor 
races of Russia. 

Mao is an ardent student of philosophy. Once, when I 
was having some nightly interviews with him on Com- 
munist history, a visitor brought him several new books on 
philosophy, and Mao asked me to postpone our engage- 
ments. He consumed these books in three or four nights of 
intensive reading, during which he seemed oblivious to ev-, 
erything else. He had not confined his reading to Marxist 
philosophers, but had read something of the ancient Greeks, 
of Spinoza, Kant, Goethe, Hegel and Rousseau, and others. 

I often wondered about Mao’s own sense of responsi- 
bility over the question of force, violence and the “neces- 
sity of killing.” He had in his youth had strongly liberal 
and humanistic tendencies, and the transition from idealism 
to realism could only have been made philosophically. Al- 
though he was peasant-born, he did not as a youth person- 
ally suffer much from oppression of the landlords, as did 
many Reds, and, although Marxism is the core of his thought, 
I deduce that class hatred is for him probably fundamen- 
tally a mechanism to the bulwark of his philosophy, rather 
than a basic impulse to action. 

There seemed to be nothing in him that might be called 
religious feeling; his judgments were reached, I believe, on 



yS IN “defended peace” 

the basis of reason and necessity. Because of this I think he 
has probably on the whole been a moderating influence in 
the Communist movement where life and death are con- 
cerned, It seemed to me that he tried to make his philoso- 
phy, the dialectics of “the long view,” his criterion in any 
large course of action, and in that range of thought the 
preciousness of human life is only relative. This is distinctly 
unusual among Chinese leaders, who historically have al- 
ways placed expediency above ethics. 

Mao works thirteen or fourteen hours a day, often until 
very late at night, frequently retiring at two or three. He 
seems to have an iron constitution. This he traces to a youth 
spent in hard work on his father’s farm, and to an austere 
period in his schooldays when he formed a kind of Spartan 
club with some comrades. They used to fast, go on long 
hikes in the wooded hills of South China, swim in the cold- 
est weather, walk shirtless in the rain and sleet — all this to 
toughen themselves. They intuitively knew that the years 
ahead in China would demand the capacity for withstand- 
ing great hardship and suffering. 

Mao once spent a summer tramping all over Hunan, his 
native province. He earned his bread by working from 
farm to farm, and sometimes by begging. Another time, for 
days, he ate nothing but hard beans and water — again a 
process of “toughening” his stomach. The friendships he 
made on these country rambles in his early youth were of 
great value to him when, some ten years later, he began to 
organize thousands of farmers in Hunan into the famous 
peasant unions which became the first base of the Soviets, 
after the Kuomintang broke with the Communists in 1927. 

Mao impressed me as a man of considerable depth of 
feeling. I remember that his eyes moistened once or twice 
when speaking of dead comrades, or recalling incidents in 
his youth, during the rice riots and famines of Hunan, when 
some starving peasants were beheaded in his province for 



SOVIET STRONG MAN 79 

demanding food from the yamen. One soldier told me of 
seeing Mao give his 'coat away to a wounded man at the 
front. They say that he refused to wear shoes when the 
Red warriors had none. 

Yet I doubt very much if he would ever command great 
respect from the intellectual elite of China, perhaps not en- 
tirely because he has an extraordinary mind, but because he 
has the personal habits of a peasant. The Chinese disciples 
of Pareto might think him uncouth. I remember, when talk- 
ing with Mao one day, seeing him absent-mindedly turn 
down the belt of his trousers and search for some guests — 
but then it is just possible that Pareto might do a little 
searching himself if he lived in similar circumstances. But I 
am sure that Pareto would never take off his trousers in the 
presence of the president of the Red Academy — as Mao did 
once when I was interviewing Lin Piao. It was extremely 
hot inside the little room. Mao lay down on the bed, pulled 
off his pants, and for twenty minutes carefully studied a 
military map on the wall — interrupted occasionally by Lin 
Piao, who. asked for confirmation of dates and names, which 
Mao invariably knew. His nonchalant habits fitted with his 
complete indifference to personal appearance, although the 
means were at hand to fix himself up like a chocolate-box 
general or a politician’s picture in Who^s Who in China. 

Except for a few weeks when he was ill, he walked most 
of the 6,000 miles of the Long March, like the rank and file. 
At any time in recent years he could have acliieved high 
office and riches by “betraying” to the Kuomintang, and 
this applies to most Red commanders. The tenacity with 
which these Communists for. ten years clung to their prin- 
ciples cannot be fully evaluated unless you know the his- 
tor)^ of “silver bullets” in China, by means of which other 
rebels have customarily been bought off. 

He seemed to me sincere, honest, and truthful in his 
statements. I was able to check up on many of his assertions, 



So IN “defended peace” 

and usually found them to be correct. He subjected me to 
mild doses of political propaganda, but nothing compared 
to what I have received in non-bandit quarters, and he never , 
imposed any censorship online, either in my writing or 
photography, courtesies for v/hich I was grateful. He did 
his best to see that I got facts to explain various aspects of , 
Soviet life. 

Because of their tremendous importance in the political 
scene of China today, his main declarations of Communist 
policies are worth serious consideration. For it is quite pos- 
sible now — since the whole North-west and other large sec- 
tions of the armed and unarmed Chinese people seem to be 
in sympathy tvith many of these policies — that they may 
become vital instruments of fundamental changes in the 
destiny of China. 



2 

Basic Coimmmist Policies 



W HAT are the fundamental policies of the Chinese 
Reds today? I had a dozen or more talks on this 
subject with Mao Tse-tung and other leading Communists. 
But before we examine these policies it is necessary to have 
some conception of the nature of the long struggle between 
the Communists and Nanking. If we are to comprehend 
even the recent events in the Reddening North-west, we 
must first look at a few facts of history. 

In the following paragraphs I paraphrase, in part, the 
comments of Lo Fu, the young American-educated secre- 



BASIC COMMUNIST POLICIES ‘ 8 1 

tary of the Communist Central Committee, whom I inter- 
viewed in Pao An. It is likely to be heavy going, but I be- 
lieve it will prove worth while. 

As is well known, the Chinese Communist Party began 
only in 1921. It grew very rapidly till 1923, when Dr. Sun 
Yat-sen, founder of the Kuomintang (Nationalist Party), 
made his famous entente with Soviet Russia. Neither the 
Kuomintang nor the Kungch’antang (Communist Party) 
had power, and both claimed to be struggling to establish 
democracy. It was easy to reach an understanding. In 1924, 
the Kuomintang was reorganized with the help of Russian 
advisers, along lines of the party of Lenin. An alliance was 
formed with the Chinese Communist Party, and Commu- 
nists became very active in leading and organizing the Great 
Revolution of 1925-1927, which finally overthrew the cor- 
rupt Peking dictatorship. 

Now the basis of this co-operation, as far as the Com- 
munists were concerned, can be summarized as the accept- 
ance by Dr. Sun Yat-sen and the Kuomintang of two major 
revolutionary principles. The first recognized the necessity 
of an anti-imperialist policy — the recovery of complete po- 
litical, territorial and economic sovereignty by revolutionary 
action. The second demanded an internal policy of anti- 
feudalism and anti-militarism — the realization of a demo- 
cratic revolution against the landlords and warlords, and 
the construction of new forms of social, economic and po- 
litical life, which both the Communists and the Kuomintang 
agreed must be democratic in character. 

The Communists, of course, regarded the successful ful- 
filment of the “bourgeois-democratic” revolution as a- nec- 
essary preliminiary for any Socialist society which might 
later be established, so their position was logical in support- 
ing a “democratic national independence and liberation” 
movement. 

Unfortunately, Dr. Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, before the 



82 ;n “defended peace” 

revolution was completed. Co-operadon between the Kuo- 
mintang and the Kungch’antang came to an end in 1927. 
From the Communist viewpoint, the Nationalist Revolution 
may also be said to have ended then. The Right wing of the 
Kuomintang, dominated by the new militarism, and sup- 
ported by certain foreign powers, the treaty-port bankers, 
and the landlords, broke away from the legally elected Gov- 
ernment at Hankow. It formed a regime at Nanking under 
Chiang Kai-shek which the Communists and the majority 
of the Kuomintang at that time regarded as “counter-revo- 
lutionary”; that is, against the “bourgeois-democratic revo- 
lution” itself. 

The Kuomintang soon reconciled itself to the Nanking 
coup d’etat, but Communism became a crime punishable by 
death. What the Reds conceived to be the two main points 
of Nationalism — the anti-imperialist movement and the 
democratic revolution — were in practice abandoned. Mili- 
tarists’ civil wars and, later, intensive war against the rising 
agrarian revolution ensued. Many thousands of Communists 
and former peasant-union and labour leaders were killed. 
The unions were suppressed. An “enlightened dictatorship” 
made war on all forms of opposition. Even so, quite a num- 
ber of Communists survived in the Army, and the Party 
held together throughout a period of great terrorism. In 
1937, despite the expenditure of billions of dollars in civil 
war against them, the Red armies occupied in the North- 
west the biggest single connected territory ever under their 
complete control. 

Of course the Reds believed that the decade of history 
since. 1927 had richly validated their thesis that national in-, 
dependence and democracy (which the Kuomintang also 
set as its objective) could not be achieved in China without 
an anti-imperialist policy externally, and an agrarian revo- 
lution internally. Here it is not necessary fully to inspect 
their case. But if we are to see why Communism steadily 



BASIC COMMUNIST POLICIES 83 

increased its following, especially among patriotic youth, 
and why at the moment it still projects upon the screen of 
history the shadows of great upheaval and change in the 
Orient, we must note its main contentions. What are they? 

First of all, the Reds asserted that, after Nanking split 
the living forces of the revolution, China rapidly lost much 
ground. Compromise followed compromise. The failure to 
realize agrarian revolution resulted in widespread discontent 
and open rebellion from the rural population in many parts 
of the country. General conditions of poverty and distress 
among the rural populace seriously worsened. No econo- 
mist who had got beyond the discovery that China now had 
some passable motor roads, an excellent fleet of aeroplanes, 
and a New Life movement, could fail to be depressed with 
the melancholy outlook for the future. Reports came in 
daily of catastrophes which in most countries would be 
considered colossal, but in China were more or less routine. 
Even as I write, for example, the press brings this appalling 
news from Central and West China; 

“Famine conditions continue to be reported in Honan, 
Anhui, Shensi, Kansu, Szechuan, and Kweichow. Quite evi- 
dently the country faces one of the most severe famines of 
many years, and thousands have already died. A recent sur- 
vey by the Szechuan Famine Relief Commission discovered 
that 30,000,000 people are now in the famine belt of that 
province, where bark and “Goddess-of-Aiercy” earth are 
being consumed by tens of thousands. There are said to be 
over 400,000 famine refugees in Shensi, over 1,000,000 in 
Kansu, some , 7,000,000 in Honan, and 3,000,000 in Kwei- 
chow. The famine in Kweichow is admitted by the official 
Central News to be the most serious in 100 years, affecting 
sixty districts of the province.’”^ 

Szechuan is one of the provinces where taxes had been 

'^T)e 7 nocracy, Peiping, May 15, 1937. 



84 IN “defended peace” 

collected sixty years or more in advance, and thousands of 
acres of land have been abandoned by farmers unable to 
pay rents and outrageous loan-interest. In my files were 
items, collected over a period of six years, showing compa- 
rable distress in many other provinces. There were few 
signs that the rate of frequency of these calamities was 
diminishing. ' 

While the mass of the rural population was rapidly going 
bankrupt, concentration of land and wealth in the hands of 
a small number of landlords and landowning usurers in- 
creased in proportion to the general decline of independent 
farming.^ Sir Frederick Leith-Ross is reported to have said 
that there is no middle class in China, but only the incred- 
ibly poor and the very rich; and, if this has not been true in 
the past, it may become so. Enormous taxes, the corrupt 
share-crop method, and the whole historical system of so- 
cial, political and economic relationships described by Dr. 
Karl August Wittfogel as the “Asiatic mode of produc- 
tion,” contrived to leave the landless peasantry constantly 
heavily in debt, without reserves, and wholly unable to 
meet such crises as drought, famine and flood. 

Mao Tse-tung, as secretary of the Peasants’ Committee 
of the Kuomintang in 1926 (before the break with the Com- 
munists, when Mao was candidate to the Central Executive 
Committee of Kuomintang), supervised the collection of 
land statistics for areas in twenty-one provinces. He as- 
serted that this investigation indicated that resident land- 
lords, rich peasants, officials, absentee landlords and usurers, 
about 10 per cent of the whole rural population, together 
owned over 70 per cent of the cultivatable land in China. 
About 1 5 per cent was owned by middle peasants. But over 
65 per cent of the rural population, made up of poor peas- 

^ Tlie most brilliant vmrk of research and analysis discussing this 
development is still Ch’en Han-seng’s Landlord and Peasant in China 
(New York, 1936). 


BASIC COMMUNIST POLICIES 85 

ants, tenants and farm workers, owned only from lo per 
cent to 15 per cent of the total arable land. 

“These statistics were suppressed after the counter- 
revolution,” according to Mao. “Now, ten years later, it is 
still impossible to get any statement from Nanking on land 
distribution in- China.” 

The Communists thought that rural bankruptcy had 
been accelerated by the disastrous consequences of aban- 
doning the anti-imperalist struggle, which to most Chinese 
had come to mean the “anti-Japanese struggle.” As a result 
of Nanking’s “no-war policy” against Japan, China had lost 
to Japanese invaders about a fifth of her national territor)% 
over 40 per cent of her railway mileage, 85 per cent of her 
unsettled lands, a large part of her coal, 80 per cent of her 
iron deposits, 37 per cent of her finest forest lands, and 
about 40 per cent of her national export trade. Japan now 
controlled over 75 per cent of the total pig iron and iron 
mining enterprises of what remained of China, and over 
half of the textile industry of China. The conquest of Man- 
churia also robbed China of its own best market as well as 
its most accessible raw materials. In 1931, Manchuria took 
over 27 "per cent of its total imports from other Chinese 
provinces, but, in 1935, China could sell Manchukuo only 
4 per cent of those imports. It presented Japan with the 
region of China best suited for industrial development — and 
enabled her to prevent that development, and shuttle the 
raw materials to her own industries. It gave to Japan the 
continental base from which she could inexorably continue 
her aggression in China. These were changes which, many 
felt, completely wiped out the benefits of any reforms that 
Nanking might be able to claim to its credit for generations 
in the future — even provided the rest of China remained 
intact. 

And what was achieved by Nanking’s nine years of war 
against the Reds? The North-west junta had recently sum- 



86 IN “defended peace” 

marized these results in a manifesto opposing preparations 
for the sixth anti-Red “final-annihilation” drive. It reminded 
us that Manchuria had gone to Japan during one “final- 
annihilation” drive, Shanghai invaded during another, Jehol 
given up during the third. East Hopei lost during still an- 
other, and the sovereignty of Hopei and Chahar provinces 
badly impaired during the fifth “remnant-bandit extermi- 
nation.” 

Of course Nanking could not stop civil war as long as 
the Reds continued to attempt to overthrow the Govern- 
ment by force. But as early as 1932 the Reds had proposed 
peace, and offered to unite with Nanking, on a common 
program of resistance to Japan. Their proposals had been 
rejected. Now, once more, despite the great strategic ad- 
vantages which the Red Army enjoyed in its developing 
position in the North-west, the Communist Party, in col- ' 
laboration with anti-Japanese armies and patriotic associa- 
tions throughout China, had renewed its offers to co-oper- 
ate to end civil war and create a national “anti-Japanese 
front” against the aggressor. It promised to submit its Red 
Army and its Soviet districts to the complete authority of 
the Central Government provided that Nanking would 
agree to establish democratic representative government, 
resist Japan, enfranchise the people, and guarantee civil lib- 
erties to the masses. In other words, the Reds were ready 
to “remarry” the Kuomintang if it would return to the 
“bourgeois-nationalist” programme of anti-imperialism and 
anti-feudalism. But of these two basic aims they realized 
that the fight for national survival was paramount, and must 
be conducted even at the expense of abandoning the inter- 
nal struggle over the land question; that class antagonisms 
might have to be sublimated in, certainly could not be sat- 
isfied without, the successful solution of the. external strug- 
gle against Japan. 

To quote Mao Tse-tung, in his interview with me: 



BASIC COMMUNIST POLICIES 87 

“The fundamental issue before the Chinese people today 
is the Struggle against Japanese imperialism. Our Soviet pol- 
icy is decisively conditioned by this struggle. Japan’s war- 
lords hope to subjugate the whole of China and make of the 
Chinese people their colonial slaves. The fight against the 
Japanese invasion, the fight against Japanese economic and 
military conquest — these are the main tasks that must be 
remembered in analyzing Soviet policies. 

“Japanese imperialism is not only the enemy of China, 
but also of all people of the world who desire 'peace. Espe- 
cially it is the enemy of those peoples with interests on the 
Pacific Ocean; namely, the American, British, French and 
Soviet Russian nations. The Japanese continental policy, 
as well as naval policy, is directed, not only against China, 
but also against those countries. . . . 

“What do we expect from the foreign powers? We ex- 
pect at least that friendly nations will not help Japanese 
imperialism, and will adopt a neutral position. We hope 
that they will actively help China to resist invasion and 
conquest.” ' 

In using the word “imperialism,” the Communists now 
sharply distinguished between Japan, who was actively ag- 
gressive and preparing to invade China, and democratic 
capitalist powers who were friendly and non-aggressive. 
i\lao Tse-tung explained; 

. “Concerning the question of imperialism in general we 
observe that among the great powers some express unyfill- 
ingness to engage in a new world y'ar, some are not. ready 
to see Japan occupy China: countries such as America, 
Great Britain, France, Holland and Belgium. Then there 
are countries permanently under the menace of the aggres- 
sive powers, such as Siam, the Philippines, Central Ameri- 
can countries, Canada, India, Ausuralia, the Dutch Indies, 
etc. — all more or less under the threat of Japan. We con- 
sider them our friends and invite their co-operation. , . . 



88 


IN “defended peace” 

“So, except for Japan and those countries which help 
Japanese imperialism, the categories mentioned above can be 
organized into anti-war, anti-aggression, anti-Fascist world 
alliances. ... In the past, Nanking has received much help 
from America, England and other countries. Most of these 
funds and supplies have been used in civil war. For every 
Red soldier killed, Nanking has slain many peasants and 
workers. According to a" recent article by the banker, 
Chang Nai-ch’i, it has cost the Chinese people about $80,000 
for every Red soldier killed by Nanking.^ Such ‘help,’ 
therefore, does not seem to us to have been rendered to the 
Chinese people. 

“Only when Nanking determines to cease civil war and 
to fight against Japanese imperialism, and unites with the 
people’s revolution to organize a democratic national de- 
fence Government — only then can such help be of real 
benefit to the Chinese nation.” 

I asked Mao vdiether the Soviets were in favour of can- 
celling unequal treaties. He pointed out that many of these 
unequal treaties have, in effect, already been destroyed by 
the Japanese, especially in the case of Manchuria. But as for 
the future attitude of a representative Government in' China, 
he declared: 

“Those powers that help or do not oppose China in her 
war of independence and liberation should be invited to 
enjoy close friendly relations with China. Those powers 
which actively assist Japan should naturally not be given 
the same treatment: for example, Germany and Italy, vTich 
have already established special relations with Manchukuo, 
and cannot be regarded as powers friendly to the Chinese 
people. 


^ Far more civilians and “partisans” were killed than regular Red 
soldiers. Mr. Chang’s estimate included costs of lost labour, 'lost crops, 
ruined villages and towns, ruined farmlands, etc., as well as actual 
military expenses. 



BASIC COMMUNIST POLICIES 89 

“With friendly powers, China will peacefully negotiate 
treaties of mutual advantage. With other powers China is 
prepared to maintain co-operation on a' much broader scale. 
... So far as Japan is concerned, China must by the act of 
war of liberation cancel all unequal treaties, confiscate all 
Japanese imperialist holdings, and annul Japan’s special priv- 
ileges, concessions, and influence in this country. Concern- 
ing our relations with other powers, we Communists do not 
advocate any measure that may place at disadvantage the 
world position of China in her struggle against Japanese 
imperialism. 

“When China really wins her independence, then legiti- 
mate foreign trading interests will enjoy more opportunities 
than ever before. The power of production and consump- 
tion of 450,000,000 people is not a matter that can remain 
the exclusive interest of the Chinese, but one that must en- 
gage the many nations. Our millions of people, once really 
emancipated, with their great latent productive possibilities 
freed for creative activity in every field, can help improve 
the economy as well as raise the cultural level of the whole 
world. But the productive power of the Chinese people has 
in the past scarcely been touched; on the contrary, it has 
been suppressed — both by native militarists and Japanese 
imperialism.” 

Finally I asked, “Is it possible for China to make anti- 
imperialist alliances with democratic capitalist powers?” 

“Anti-imperialist, anti-Fascist alliances,” replied Mao,, 
“are in the nature of peace alliances, and for mutual defence 
against war-making nations. A Chinese anti-Fascist pact 
with capitalist democracies is perfectly possible and desir- 
able. It is to the interest of such countries to join the anti- 
Fascist front in self-defence. . . . 

“If China should become completely colonized it would 
mean the beginning of a long series of terrible and senseless 
wars. A choice must be made. For itself, the Chinese people 



po IN “defended peace” 

will take the road of struggle against its oppressors, and we 
hope also that the statesmen and people of foreign nations 
will march with us on this road, and not follow the dark 
paths laid down by the bloody history of imperialism. . . . 

“To oppose Japan successfully, China must also seek as- 
sistance from other powers. This does not mean, however, 
that China is incapable of fighting Japan without foreign 
help! The Chinese Communist Party, the Soviet Govern- 
ment, the Red Army, and the Chinese people are ready to 
unite with any power to shorten the duration of this war. 
But if none join us we are determined to carry on alone!” 

But how absurd! Do the Reds really imagine that China 
can defeat Japan’s mighty war-machine? I believe they do. 
What is the peculiar shape of logic on which they base their 
assumption of triumph? It was one of dozens of questions I 
put to Mao Tse-tung. And his answer, which follows, is a 
stimulating and perhaps a prophetic thing indeed, even 
though the orthodox military mind may find it technically 
fallacious. 



On War with Japan . 

< > 

O N JULY i6, 1936, I sat on a square, backless stool in- 
side Mao Tse-tung’s residence. It was after nine at 
night, “Taps” had been sounded and nearly all lights were 
out. The walls and ceiling of Mao’s home were of solid 
rock; beneath was a flooring of bricks. Cotton gauze ex- 
tended half-way up windows also hollowed from stone, and 



92 IN “defended peace” 

their independence. Therefore the main problem of impe- 
rialism will have been solved.” 

“Under Avhat conditions do you think the Chinese peo- 
ple can defeat and exhaust the forces of Japan?” I asked. 

He replied: “Three conditions will guarantee our suc- 
cess: first, the achievement of the National United Front 
against Japanese imperialism in China; second, the forma- 
tion of a World Anti-Japanese United Front; third, revolu- 
tionary action by the oppressed peoples at present suffering 
under Japanese imperialism. Of these, the central necessity 
is the union of the Chinese people themselves.” 

My question: “How long do you think such a war 
would last?” 

Mao’s answer: “Tliat depends on the strength of the 
Chinese People’s Front, many conditioning factors in China 
and Japan, and the degree of international help given to 
China, as well as the rate of revolutionary development in 
Japan. If the Chinese People’s Front is powerfully homo- 
geneous, if it is effectively organized horizontally and ver- 
tically, if the international aid to China is considerable from 
those Governments which recognize the menace of Japa- 
nese imperialism to their own interests, if revolution comes 
quickly in Japan, the war^ will be short and victory speed- 
ily won. If these conditions are not realized, however, the 
war will be very long, but in the end, just the same, Japan 
will be defeated, only the sacrifices will be extensive and it 
\FilI be a painful period for the \vhole world.” 

Question: “What is your opinion of the probable course 
of development of such a war, politically and militarily?” 

Answer: “Two questions are involved here — the policy 

^ The Communists were already “officially” at war with Japan, the 
Soviet Government having declared such war in a proclamation issued 
in Kiangsi, early in 1932. Publication of the proclaman'on was sup- 
pressed by the Kuomintang. Cf. Red China-. Preside 7 it Mao Tse-tung 
Reports, etc., p. 6 (London, 1934). 



ON AVAR WaXH JAPAN 93 

of the foreign poAvers, and the strategy of China’s armies. 

“Noav, the Japanese continental policy is already fixed 
and it is Avell knoAAm. Those AA'ho imagine that by further 
sacrifices of Chinese sovereignty, by making economic, po- 
litical or territorial compromises and concessions, they can 
halt the advance of Japan, are only indulging in Utopian 
fancy. Nanking has in the past adopted erroneous policies 
based on this strategy, and we have only to look at the map 
of East Asia to see the results of it. 

“But AA'^e knoAV Avell enough that, not only North China, 
but the Lower Yangtze Valley and our southern seaports 
are already included in the Japanese continental programme. 
MoreoA’^er, it is just as clear that the Japanese Navy aspires, 
to blockade the China seas and to seize the Philippines, 
Siam, Indo-China, Malaya, and the Dutch East Indies. In 
the event of war, Japan AAfill try to make them her strategic 
bases, cutting off Great Britain, France and America from 
China, and monopolizing the seas of the southern Pacific. 
These moves are included in Japan’s plans of naval strategy, 
copies of AA'hich AA^e have seen. And such naval strategy AAdll 
be co-ordinated AAdth the land strategy of Japan. 

“Many people think it Avould be impossible for China to 
continue her fight against Japan, once the latter had seized 
certain strategic points on the coast and enforced a block- 
ade. This is nonsense. To refute it Ave have only to refer to 
the history of the Red Army. In certain periods our forces 
haA’^e been exceeded numerically some ten or tAventy times 
by the Kuomintang troops, AA'hich Avere also superior to us 
in equipment. Their economic resources many times sur- 
passed ours, and they received material assistance from the 
outside. Mfiiy, then, has the Red Army scored success after 
success against the "White troops and not only sund\red till 
today, but increased its power? 

“The explanation is that the Red Army and the So\det 



94 IN “defended peace” 

Government had created among all people within their areas 
a rock-like solidaritv, because everyone in the Soviets was 
ready to fight for their Government against its oppressors, 
because every person was voluntarily and consciously fight- 
ing for his own interests and what he believed to be right. 
Secondly, in the struggle of the Soviets the people were led 
by men of ability, strength and determination, equipped 
with deep understanding of the strategic, political, eco- 
nomic and military needs of their position. The Red Army 
vmn its many victories — ^beginning with only a few dozen 
rifles in the hands of determined revolutionaries — ^because 
its solid base in the people attracted friends even among the 
White troops and among the civilian populace as well as 
among the troops. The enemy was infinitely our superior 
militarily, but politically it tvas immobilized. 

“In the anti-Japanese war the Chinese people would 
have on their side greater advantages than those the Red 
Army has utilized in its struggle with the Kuomintang. 
China is a very big nation, and it cannot be said to be con- 
quered until every inch of it is under the sword of the in- 
vader. If Japan should succeed in occupying even a large, 
section of China, getting possession oi an area with as many 
as one hundred or even twc hundred million people, we 
would still be far from defeated. We would still have left 
a great force to fight against Japan’s warlords, who W'ould 
also have to fight a heavy and constant rear-guard action 
throughout the entire war. 

“As for munitions, the Japanese cannot seize our arsenals 
in the interior, which are sufficient to equip Chinese armies 
for many years, nor can they prevent us from capturing 
great amounts of arms and ammunition from their own 
hands. By the latter method the Red Army has equipped its 
present forces from the Kuomintang: for nine years they 
have been our ‘ammunition-carriers.’ IVhat infinitely greater 
possibilities would open up for the utilization of such tac- 



ON WAR WITH JAPAN 95 

tics as won our arms for us if the whole Chinese people 
were united against Japan! 

“Economically, of course, China is not unified. But the 
uneven development of China’s economy also presents ad- 
vantages in a war against the highly centralized and highly 
concentrated economy of Japan. For example, to sever 
Shanghai from the rest of China is ndt as disastrous to the 
country as would be, for instance, the severance of New 
York from the rest of America. iMoreover, it is impossible 
for Japan to isolate all of China; China’s North-west, South- 
west and West cannot be blockaded by Japan, who con- 
tinentally is still a sea power, 

“Thus, once more the central point of the problem be- 
comes the mobilization and unification of the entire Chinese 
people and the building up of a United Front, such as has 
been advocated by the Communist Party ever since 1932.” 

Question: “In the event of a Sino-Japanese war, do you 
think there will be a revolution in Japan.^” 

Answer; “The Japanese revolution is not only a possi- 
bility but a certainty. It is inevitable and will begin to occur 
promptly after the first severe defeats suffered by the Japa- 
nese Army.” 

Question; “Do you think Soviet Russia and Outer Mon- 
golia would become involved in this war, and would come 
to the assistance of China? Under ydiat circumstances is 
that likely?” 

Answer; “Of course the Soviet Union is also not an iso- 
lated country. It cannot ignore events in the Far East. It 
cannot remain passive. Will it complacently U'atch Japan 
conquer all China and make of it a strategic base from 
whicli to attack the U.S.S.R.? Or will it help the Chinese 
people to oppose their Japanese oppressors, win their inde- 
pendence, and establish friendly relations with the Russian 
people? We think Russia will choose the latter course. 

“We believe that once the Chinese people have their 



96 IN “defended peace” 

own government and begin this war of resistance and want 
to establish friendly alliances with the U.S.S.R., as well as 
other friendly powers, the Soviet Union will be in the van- 
guard to shake hands with us. Tlie struggle against Japanese 
imperialism is a world task and the Soviet Union, as part of 
that world, can no more remain neutral than can England 
or America.” 

Question: “Is it the immediate task of the Chinese peo- 
ple to regain all the territories lost to Japanese imperialism, 
or only to drive Japan from North China, and all Chinese 
territory above the Great Wall.^” 

Answer: “It is the immediate task of China to regain all 
our lost territories, not merely to defend our sovereignty 
below the Great Wall. This means that Manchuria must be 
regained. We do not, however, include Korea, formerly a 
Chinese colony, but when we have re-established the inde- 
pendence of the lost territories of China, and if the Koreans 
wish to break away from the chains of- Japanese imperialism, 
we will extend them our enthusiastic help in their struggle 
for independence. The same thing applies for Formosa. As 
for Inner Mongolia,’^ which is populated by both Chinese 
and Mongolians, we will struggle to drive Japan from there 
and help Inner Mongolia to establish an autonomous State.” 

Question: “In actual practice, how could the Soviet 
Government and the Red Army co-operate with the Kuo- 
mintang armies in a war against Japan? In a foreign war it 
would be necessary for all Chinese armies to be placed un- 
der a centralized command: Would the Red Army agree, 

In answer to a later question, in another interview, Mao Tse-tung 
made the following statement concerning Outer Mongolia: 

“The relationship between Outer Mongolia and the Soviet Union, 
now and in the past, has always been based on the principle o,f com- 
plete equality. When the people’s revolution has been victorious in 
China the Outer Mongolian republic will automatically become a part 
of the Chinese federation, at their own will. The Mohammedan and 
Tibetan peoples, likewise, will form autonomous republics attached 
to the China federation.” 



ON WAR WITH JAPAN 97 

if allowed representation on a supreme war council, to sub- 
mit to its decisions both militarily and politically?” 

Answer: “Yes. Our Government will whole-heartedly 
submit to the decisions of such a council, provided it really 
resists Japan.” 

Question: “Would the Red Army agree not to move its 
troops into or against any areas occupied by Kuomintang 
armies, except with the consent or at the order of the su- 
preme war council?” 

Answer: “Yes. Certainly we will not move our troops 
into any areas occupied by anti-Japanese armies — nor have 
we done so for some time past. The Red Army would not 
utilize any wartime situation in an opportunist wav.” 

Question: “What demands would the Communist Party 
make in return for such co-operation?” 

Answer: “It would insist upon waging war, decisively 
and finally, against Japanese aggression. In addition it would 
request the observance of the points advanced in the calls 
for a democratic republic and the establishment of a na- 
tional defence Government.’”- 

Question: “How can the people best be armed, organ- 
ized and trained to participate in such a war?” 

Answer: “The people vnist be given the right to organ- 
ize and to arm themselves. This is a freedom which Chiang 
Kai-shek has in the past denied to them. The suppression 
has not, however, been entirely successful — as, for example, 
in the case of the Red Army. Also, despite severe repression 
in Peiping, in Shanghai and other places, the students have 
begun to organize themselves and have already prepared 
themselves politically. But still the students and the revolu- 
tionary anti-Japanese masses have not yet got their freedom, 
cannot be mobilized, cannot be trained and armed. I^Ten 
the contrary is true, when the masses are given economic, 

^ Discussed in several proclamations issued in 1935 and 1936, by 
the Soviet Government and the Red Army, to the Kuomintang. 



98 ‘ IN “defended peace” 

social and political freedom, their strength will be intensi- 
fied hundreds of times, and the true potver of the nation 
will be revealed. 

“The Red Army through its own struggle has won its 
freedom from the militarists to become an unconquerable 
power. The anti-Japanese volunteers have won their free- 
dom of action from the Japanese oppressors and have armed 
themselves in a similar way. If the Chinese people are 
trained, armed and organized they can likewise become an 
invincible force.” 

Question: “What, in your opinion, should be the main 
strategy and tactics to be followed in this ‘war of libera- 
tion’.?” 

Answer: “The strategy should be that of a war of ma- 
noeuvre, over an extended, shifting and indefinite front: a 
strategy depending for success on a high degree of mobility 
in difficult terrain, and featured by swift attack and vdth- 
drawal, swift concentration and dispersal. It will be a large- 
scale war of manoeuvre rather than the simple positional 
war of extensive trench-work, deep-massed lines and heavy 
fortifications. Our strategy and tactics must be conditioned 
by the theatre in which the war will take place, and this 
dictates a war of manoeuvre. 

“This does not mean the abandonment of vital strategic 
points, which can be defended in positional warfare as long 
as profitable. But the pivotal strategy must be a war of ma- 
noeuvre, and important reliance must be placed on guerrilla 
and partisan tactics. Fortified warfare must be utilized, but 
it will be of auxiliary and secondary strategic importance.” 

Here it may be inserted that this sort of strategy in gen- 
eral seems to be rather widely supported also among non- 
Communist Chinese military leaders. Nanking’s wholly im- 
ported air force provides an impressive if costly internal 
police machine, but few experts have any illusions about its 



ox WAR WITH JAPAX 99 

long-range value in a foreign war. Both the air force and 
such mechanization as has taken place in the central army 
are looked upon by many as costly toys certain to be of 
surprise value and of auxiliary defence service in the early 
stages of the war, but quite incapable of retaining a role of 
initiative after the first few weeks, since China is almost 
utterly lacking in the basic war industries necessar}’ to main- 
tain and replenish either an air force or any other highly 
technical branch of modern warfare. 

Pai Chung-hsi, Li Tsung-jen, Han Fu-chu, Hu Tsung- 
nan, Chen Ch’eng, Chang Hsueh-liang, Feng Yii-hsiang and 
Ts’ai T’inff-k’ai are among those who seem to have this be- 
lief: That China’s sole hope of victory ov^r Japan must rest 
ultimately on superior manoeuvring of great masses of 
troops, divided into mobile units, and the ability to main- 
tain a protracted defence over immense partisan areas. Such, 
at least, is the theory. 

Mao Tse-tung continued: 

“Geographically the theatre of the war is so vast that it 
is possible for us to pursue mobile warfare with the utmost 
elficiency and with a telling effect on a slow-moving war- 
machine like Japan’s, cautiously feeling its way in front of 
fierce rear-guard actions. Deep concentration and the ex- 
hausting defence of a vital position or turn on a narrow 
front would be to throw away all the tactical advantages of 
our geography and economic organization, and to repeat 
the mistake of the Abyssinians. Our strategy and tactics 
must aim to avoid great decisive battles in the early stages 
of the v’ar, and gradually to break the morale, the fighting 
spirit and the military efficiency of the living forces of the 
enemy. 

“The mistake of the Abyssinians, quite aside from the 
internal political weaknesses of their position, was that they 
attempted to hold a deep front, enabling the Fascists to 



lOO IN “defended peace” 

bombard, gas and strike with their technically . stronger 
military machines at heavy immobile concentrations, ex- 
posing themselves to vital organic injury. 

“Besides the regular Chinese troops we should create, 
direct, and politically and militarily equip great numbers of 
partisan and guerrilla detachments among the peasantry. 
What has been accomplished by the anti-Japanese volunteer 
units of this type in Manchuria is only a very minor demon- 
stration of the latent power of resistance that can be mobi- 
lized from the revolutionary peasantry of all China. Prop- 
erly led and organized, such units can keep the Japanese 
busy twenty-four hours a day and worry them to death. 

“It must be remembered that the war will be fought in 
China. This means that the Japanese will be entirely sur- 
rounded by a hostile Chinese people. The Japanese will be 
forced to move in all their provisions and guard them, main- 
taining troops along all lines of communications, and heav- 
ily garrisoning their bases in Manchuria and Japan as well. 

“The process of the war will present to China the possi- 
bility of capturing many Japanese prisoners, arms, ammuni- 
tion, war-machines, and so forth. A point will be reached 
where it will become more and more possible to engage 
Japan’s armies on a basis of positional warfare, using fortifi- 
cations and deep entrenchment, for, as the M'-ar progresses, 
the technical equipment of the anti-Japanese forces, will 
greatly improve, and 'will be reinforced by important for- 
eign help. Japan’s economy will crack' under the strain of a 
long, expensive occupation of China and the morale of her 
forces will break under the trial of a war of innumerable 
but indecisive battles. The great reservoirs of human mate- 
rial in the revolutionary Chinese people will still be pouring 
men ready to fight for their freedom into our front lines 
long after the tidal flood of Japanese imperialism has 
wrecked itself on tlie hidden reefs of Chinese resistance! 

“All these and other factors will condition the war and 



0?s WAR WITH JAPAN lOI 

will enable us to make the final and decisive attacks on Ja-. 
pan’s fortifications and strategic bases and to drive Japan’s 
army of occupation from China. 

^'Japanese officers and soldiers captured and disarmed by 
us will be 'welcotited and will be well-treated. They will not 
be killed. They will be treated in a brothe^'ly way. Every 
7nethod will be adopted to make the Japanese proletarian 
soldiers, with whom we have no quarrel, stand up and op-- 
pose their own Fascist oppressors. Oitr slogan will be: 
''IJiiite and oppose the coimnon oppressors, the Fascist lead- 
ers' Anti-Fascist Japanese troops are our jrieiids, and there 
is no co7ifiict in our aims." 

It was past two o’clock in the morning and I was ex- 
hausted, but I could see no signs of fatigue on Mao’s 
thoughtful face. He alternately walked up and down be- 
tween the tv'^o little rooms, sat down, lay dovm, leaned on 
the table, and read from a sheaf of reports in the intervals 
when Wu translated and I wrote. Mrs. Mao also was still 
awake. Suddenly both them bent over and gave an e,\-clama- 
tion of delight at a moth that had languished beside the 
candle. It was a really lot'^ely thing, with wings shaded a. 
delicate apple-green and fringed in a soft rainbow of saf- 
fron and rose. Mao opened a book and pressed this gossamer 
of colour between its leaves. 

Coul^ such people really be thinking seriously of war? 

I suddenly remembered that I had a date next morning 
at eight, to visit the Hung-Chiin Ta-Hsueh, or Red Army 
Academy — which was perhaps as good a place as any to 
study the “sincerity” of the anti-Japanese feelings ^Chi- 
nese ggii'in.yinists. 



4 

$2,000,000 in Heads 


cj |3 

T here were many things unique about the Hung- 
Chiin Ta-Hsueh. 

Its president was a twenty-eight-year-old army com- 
mander who was said to have never lost a battle. It boasted, 
in one class of undergraduates, veteran warriors whose 
average age was twenty-seven, with 'an average of eight 
years of fighting experience and three wounds each. VVas 
there any other school where “paper shoitage” made it nec- 
essary to use the blank side of enemy propaganda leaflets for 
class-room note-books? Or where the cost of educating 
each cadet, including food, clothing, all institutional ex- 
penses, was less than $15 silver per month? Or where the 
aggregate value of rewards, offered for the heads of various 
notorious cadets, exceeded $2,000,000? 

Such was the Red Academy. 

Finally, it was probably the world’s only seat of “higher 
learning” whose class-rooms were caves, with chairs and 
desks of stone and brick, whose blackboards were wails of 
limestone and clay, and whose buildings were completely 
bomb-proof. 

.‘This latter happened because in Shensi and Kansu, be-- 
sides ordinary houses, there are great cave dwellings, temple 

fda r 



§2,000,000 IN’ HEADS IO 3 

grottoes and castled battlements, hundreds of years old. 
■Wealthy officials and landlords built these queer edifices, 
a thousand years ago, to guard against flood and invasion 
and famine, and here hoarded the grain and treasure to see 
them through sieges of each. Many-vaulted chambers, cut. 
deeply into the loess or solid rock, some with rooms that 
will hold several hundred people, these cliff-dwellings made 
perfect bomb-proof shelters. In such archaic manors the Red 
Army Academy found strange but safe accommodation. 

Lin Piao, the Academy president, was introduced to me 
soon after my arrival, and he invited me to speak one day 
to his cadets. He suggested the topic: “British and American 
policies towards China.” I demurred. I know too little about 
both. But Lin insisted. When he arranged a “noodle dinner” 
for the occasion it was too much for me, and I succumbed. 

Lin Piao was the son of a factory owner in Hupeh prov- 
ince, and was born in igoS. His father was ruined by ex- 
tortionate taxation, but Lin managed to get through prep 
school, and became a cadet in the famous Whampoa Acad- 
emy at Canton. There he made a brilliant record. He re- 
ceived intensive political and military training, under Chiang 
Kai-shek and Chiang’s chief adviser, the Russian General 
Bluecher. Soon after his graduation the Nationalist Expe- 
dition began, and Lin Piao was promoted to a captaincy. 
By 1927, at the age of twenty, he tvas a colonel in the noted 
Fourth Kuomintang Aimv, under Chang Fa-kuei. And in 
August of that year, after the Right coup d'etat at Nanking, 
he led his regiment to join the 20th Army under Ho Lung 
and Yeh Ting in the Nanchang Uprising, which began the 
Communists’ armed struggle for power. 

With Mao Tse-tung, Lin Piao shared the distinction 0/ 
being one of the few Red commanders never Avounded, 
Engaged on the front in more than a hundred battles, in 
field command for more than ten years, e.xposed to every 
hardship that his men had knotvn, Avitli a reward of § 100,00a 



104 “defended peace” 

on his head, he miraculously remained unhurt and in good 

health. 

In 1932, Lin Piao was given command of the First Red 
Army Corps, which then numbered about 20,000 rifles. It 
became the most dreaded section of the Red Army. Chiefly 
due to Lin’s extraordinary talent as a tactician, it destroyed, 
defeated or out-manoeuvred every Government force sent 
against it and was never broken in battle. The mere discov- 
ery that they were fighting the First Red Army Corps is 
said to have at times put a Nanking army to rout. But of 
these famed “iron troops” more later, when I reach the front. 

Like many able Red commanders, Lin had never been 
outside China, and spoke and read no language but Chinese. 
Before the age of thirty, however, he had already won rec- 
ognition beyond Red circles. His articles in the Chinese 
Reds’ military magazines. Struggle and War cmd Revolu- 
tion, have been republished, studied and criticized in Nan- 
king military journals, and also in Japan and Soviet Russia. 
He was noted as the originator of the “short-attack” — a 

O 

tactic on which General Feng Yii-hsiang had critically com- 
mented. To the Reds’ skilful mastery of the “short-attack” 
many victories of the First Army Corps were said to be 
•vraceable. 

With Commander Lin and his faculty I journeyed one 
morning a short distance beyond the walls of Pao An to the 
Red Army Academy. We arrived at recreation hour. Some 
of the cadets were playing basketball on the two courts set 
up; others were playing tennis on a court laid down on the 
turf beside a tributary of the Yellow River, which skirts 
Pao An. Still other cadets were playing table tennis, writ- 
ing, reading new books and magazines, or studying in their 
primitive “clubrooms.” 

This was the First Section of the Academy, in which 
there were some 200 students. Altogether, Hung Ta, as the 
school was known in the Soviet districts, had four sections. 



$2,000,000 IN HEADS 105 

with over 800 students. There were also, near Pao An, and 
under the administrative control of the education commis- 
sioner, radio, cavalry, agricultural and medical-training 
schools. There was a Communist Party training school and 
a mass-education training centre. 

Over 200 cadets assembled to hear me explain “British 
and American policies.” I made a crude summary of Anglo- 
American attitudes, and agreed to answer questions. It was 
a great mistake, I soon realized, and the noodle dinner 
hardly compensated for my embarrassment. The questions 
put to me would defy the erudition and ingenuit)’’ of Mr. 
H. G. Weils. Consider, for example, how you would an- 
swer the following interrogations that confronted me: 

“What is the attitude of the British Government to- 
wards the formation of the pro-Japanese Hopei-Chahar 
Council, and the garrisoning of North China by Japanese 
troops?” 

“What are the results of the N.R.A. policy in America, 
and how has it benefited the working class?” 

“Will Germany and Italy help Japan if a war breaks out 
with China?” 

“How long do you think Japan can 'carry on a major 
war against China, if she is not helped by other powers?” 

“Why has the League of Nations failed?” 

“Why is it that, although the Communist Party is legal 
in both Great Britain and America, there is no umrkers’ 
government in either country?” 

“What progress is being made in the formation of an 
anti-Fascist front in England? In America?” 

“What is the future of the international student move- 
ment, v'hich has its centre in Paris?” 

“In your opinion, can Leith-Ross’s visit to Japan result 
in Anglo-Japanese agreement on policies towards China?” 

“When China begins to resist Japan, will America and 
Great Britain assist China or Japan?” 



io6 IN “defended peace” 

“Please tell us why America and Great Britain keep 
their fleets and armed forces in China, if they are friends of 
the Chinese people?” 

“What do the American and British workers think of 
the U.S.S.R.?” 

No small territory to cover in a two-hour question- 
period! And it was not confined to two hours. Beginning 
at ten in the morning it continued till late in the afternoon. 
In the end it proved inconclusive, and disrupted work for 
the day. 

Afterwards I toured the various class-rooms, and talked 
with Lin Piao and his faculty. They told me something of 
the conditions of enrollment in their school, and showed me 
printed announcements of its courses, thousands of copies 
of which had been secretly distributed throughout China. 
Four sections of the academy invited “all who are deter- 
mined to fight Japanese imperialism and to offer themselves 
for the national revolutionary cause, regardless of class, so- 
cial or political differences.” The age limit was sixteen to 
nventy-eight, “regardless of sex.” “The applicants must be 
physically strong, free from epidemic diseases,” and also — 
which seems quite sweeping — “free from all bad habits.’-’ 

In practice, I discovered, most of the cadets in the First 
Section were battalion, regimental or division commanders 
or political commissars of the Red Army, receiving ad- 
vanced military and political training. The course offered 
lasted four months. According to Red Army regulations, 
every active commander or commissar is supposed to spend 
at least that period in the Red Academy during every two 
years of active service. 

Second and Third Sections included platoon, company 
and squad commanders, experienced fighters in the Red 
Army, as well as new recruits selected from “graduates of 
middle schools or the equivalent, unemployed teachers or 
officers, cadres of anti-Japanese volunteer corps, and anti- 



$2,000,000 IN HEADS IO 7 

Japanese partisan leaders, and workers who have engaged 
in organizing and leading labour movements.” Over sixty 
middle-school graduates from Shansi had joined the Reds 
during their expedition to that province. 

Classes in the Second and Third Sections lasted six 
months. The Fourth Section was devoted chiefly to “train- 
ing engineens, cavalry cadres, and artillery units.” Here I 
met some former machinists and apprentices. Later on, as I 
was leaving Red China, I was to meet, entering by truck, 
eight new recruits for the Red Academy, arriving from 
Shanghai and Peiping. Lin Piao told me that they had a 
waiting list of over 2,000 students applicants from all parts 
of China, the chief problem (at that time) being one of 
transportation, as every cadet had to be “smuggled” in. 

The curriculum varied in different sections of Hung Ta, 
but the diet of cadets in the First Section may be taken as 
sample fare. Political lectures included these courses: Po- 
litical Knowledge, Problems of the Chinese Revolution, 
Political Economy, Party Construction, Tactical Problems 
of the Republic, Leninism and Historical Foundations of 
Democracy, and Political and Social Forces in Japan. Mili- 
tary courses included: Problems of Strategy in the Wav 
tVith Japan, Manoeuvring Warfare (against Japan), and the 
Development of Partisan Warfare in the Anti- Japanese W'ar. 

Special text-books had been prepared for some of these 
courses. Some were cari’ied clear from the Soviet publishing 
house in Kiangsi, where (I was told) more than eight hun- 
dred printers were employed in the main plant. In other 
courses the materials used were lectures by Red Army com- 
manders and party leaders, dealing U'ith historical experi- 
ences of the Russian and the Chinese revolutions, or utiliz- 
ing material from captured Government files, documents 
and statistics. 

These courses of Hung Ta perhaps suggest a reply to 
the question, “Do the Reds really intend to fight Japan?” 



io8 IN “defended peace” 

It suffices to show how the Reds foresee and actively plan 
for China’s “war of independence” against Japan — a war 
which they regard as inevitable unless, by some miracle, 
Japan withdraws from the vast areas of China now under 
the wheels of Nippon’s military juggernaut. 

It is not a pleasant prospect. Some foreign capitalists in 
China consider it a mad prospect. But others frankly admit 
that they do not blame the Chinese, when millions of their 
people are already the conquered subjects of Japan, if they 
now prepare to die rather than yield without struggle any 
more of their freedom. 

That the Reds, at least, are fully determined to fight, 
and believe that the opening of war will find them first on 
the front, was indicated, not only in the impassioned utter- 
ances of their leaders, in grim practical schooling in the 
Army, and in their proposals for a “United Front” with 
their ten-year enemy, the Kuomintang, but also by the in- 
tensive propagandizing you saw throughout the Soviet 
districts. 

Playing a leading part in this educative mission were the 
many companies of youths, known as the Jen-Min K’ang- 
Erh Chu-She, or “People’s Anti-Japanese Dramatic Soci- 
ety,” who travelled ceaselessly back and forth in the Red 
districts, spreading the gospel of resistance, and awakening 
the slumbering nationalism of the peasantry. 

It was to one of the performances of this astonishing 
children’s theatre that I went soon after my first visit to the 
Red Academy. 



Red Theatre 



P eople were already moving dov’n towards the open- 
air stage, improvised from an old temple, y’hcn I set out 
with the young official who had invited me to the Red 
Theatre. It was Saturday, two or three hours before sunset, 
and all Pao An seemed to be going. 

Cadets, muleteers, women and girl workers from the 
uniform and shoe factory, clerks from the co-operatives 
and from the Soviet Post Office, soldiers, carpenters, vil- 
lagers followed by their infants, all began streaming to- 
wards the big grassy plain beside the river, where the play- 
ers were performing. It would be hard to imagine a more 
democratic gathering. Even some goats were grazing on 
the tennis court not far beyond. 

No tickets were sold, there was no “dress circle,” and 
there were no preferred scats. I noticed Lo Fu, secretary of 
the Central Committee, Lin Piao, president of the Red 
Academy, Lin Pai-chu, the commissioner of finance, Mao 
Tse-tung, chairman of the Government, and other officials 
and their wive.s, scattered through the crowd, seated on the 
springy turf, like the rest. No one paid much attention to 
them, once the performance had begun. 

Across the stage was a big pink curtain of silk, with the 



I lO 


IN “defended peace” 
words, “People’s Anti-Japanese Dramatic Society,” in Chi- 
nese characters, as well as Latinized Chinese, which the 
Reds were promoting to hasten mass education. The pro- 
gramme was to last three hours. It proved to be a combina- 
tion of playlets, dancing, singing, and pantomime — a kind 
of variety show, or vaudeville, given unity chiefly by tv-o 
central themes: anti-Nipponism and the revolution. It was 
full of overt propaganda, wholly unsophisticated, and the 
“props” were primitive. But it had the advantage of being 
emancipated from cymbal-crashing and falsetto-singing, 
and of dealing with living material rather than with mean- 
ingless historical intrigues that are the concern of the deca- 
dent Chinese opera. 

Finally, what it lacked in subtlety and refinement it 
partly made up by its robust vitality, its sparkling humour, 
and a sort of participation between actors and audience. 
Guests at the Red Theatre seemed actually to listen to what 
was said: a really astonishing thing in contrast Muth the 
bored opera audience, for in China opera-goers chiefly 
spend their time eating fruit and melon seeds, gossiping, 
tossing hot towels back and forth, visiting from one box to 
another, and only occasionally looking at the stage. 

The first playlet here was called Invasion. It opens in a 
Manchurian village, in 1931, with the Japanese arriving and 
driving out the “non-resisting” Chinese soldiers. In the sec- 
ond scene, Japanese officers banquet in a peasant’s home, 
using Chinese men for chairs, and drunkenly making love 
to their wives. Another scene shows Japanese dope pedlars 
selling morphine and heroin and forcing every peasant to 
buy a quantity. A youth who refuses to buy is singled out 
for questioning. 

“You don’t buy morphine, you don’t obey Manchukuo 
health rules, you don’t love your ‘divine’ Emperor Pu Yi,” 
charge his tormentors. “You are no good, you are an anti- 
Japanese bandit!” And the youth is promptly executed. 



RED THEATRE 1 1 I 

A scene in the village market-place shows small mer- 
chants peacefully selling their wares. Suddenly Japanese 
soldiers arrive, searching for more “anti-Japanese bandits.” 
Instantly they demand passports, and those who have for- 
gotten them are shot. Then two Japanese officers gorge 
themselves on a pedlar’s pork. IVhen he asks for payment 
they look at him in astonishment. “Fo?/ ask for payment? 
"Why, Chiang Kai-shek gave us Manchuria, Jehol, Chahar, 
the Tangku Truce, the Ho-Umetsu Agreement, and the 
Hopci-Chahar Council, without asking a single copper! 
And yoti want us to pa\’ for a little pork!” Whereupon, 
they impale him as a “Iwndit.” 

In the end, of course, all this proves too much for the 
villagers. Merchants turn over their stands and umbrellas, 
farmers rush forth with their spears, women and children 
come with their knives, and all swear to “fight to the death” 
against the Jih-peji-kuei — the “Japanese devils.” 

The little play was sprinkled with humour and local 
idiom. Bursts of lauo-htcr alternated with oaths of disgust 
and hatred for the Japanese. The audience got quite agi- 
tated. It was not just political propaganda to them, nor slap- 
stick melodrama, but the poignant truth itself. The fact that 
the players were mostly youths in their teens and natives of 
Shensi and Shansi seemed entirely forgotten in the onlook- 
ers’ absorption with the ideas presented. 

The substratum of bitter reality behind this portrayal, 
done as a sort of farce, was not obscured by its wit and hu- 
mour for at least one young soldier there. He stood up, at 
the end, and in a voice shaking with emotion cried out: 
“Death to the Japanese bandits! Down with the murderers 
of our Chinese people! Fight back to our homes!” The 
whole assembly echoed his slogans mightily, I learned that 
this lad was a Manchurian v'hose parents had been killed 
by the Japanese. 

Comic relief was provided at this moment by the me- 



I 12 IN “defended peace” 

andering goats! They were discovered nonchalantly con- 
suming the tennis net, which someone had forgotten to 
take down. A wave of laughter swept the audience while 
some cadets gave chase to the culprits and salvaged this im- 
portant property of the recreation department. 

Second number on the programme was a harvest dance, 
exquisitely done by a dozen girls of the Dramatic Society. 
Barefooted, clad in peasant trousers and coats and fancy ^ 
vests, with silk bandannas on their heads, they performed 
with good unison and grace. Two of these girls, I learned, 
had walked clear from Kiangsi, where they had learned to 
dance in the Reds’ dramatic school at Juichin. They had 
genuine talent. 

Another unique and amusing number was called the 
“United Front Dance,” which interpreted the mobilization 
of China to resist Japan. By what legerdemain they pro- 
duced their costumes I do not know, but suddenly there 
Were groups of youths wearing sailors’ white jumpers and 
caps, and shorts — first appearing as cavalry formations, next 
as aviation corps, then as foot soldiers, and finally as the 
Nav)^. Their pantomime and gesture, at which Chinese are 
born artists, very realistically conveyed the spirit of the 
dance. Then there was something called the “Dance of the 
Red Machines.” By sound and gesture, by an interplay and 
interlocking of arms, legs and heads, the little dancers ingen- 
iously imitated the thrust and drive of pistons, the turn of 
cogs and wheels, the hum of dynamos — and visions of a 
machine-age China of the future. 

Between acts, shouts arose for extemporaneous singing 
by people in the audience. Half a dozen native Shensi girls 
— ^vmrkers in the factories — ^were by popular demand re- 
quired to sing an old folk-song of the province, accompani- 
ment being furnished by a Shensi farmer with his home- 
made guitar. Another “command” performance was given 
by a cadet who played the harmonica, and one was called 



RED THEATRE II3 

upon to sing_a favourite song of the Southland. Then, to 
my utter consternation, a demand began that the wai-kiio 
bsin-wev cbi-cbe — the “foreign newspaperman” — strain his 
lungs in a solo of his own! 

They refused to e.xcuse me. Alas, I could think of noth- 
ing but fo.\' trots, waltze.s. La Bobeme, and “Ave Maria,” 
which all seemed inappropriate for this martial audience. I 
could not even remember the “Marseillaise.” The demand 
persisted. In e.xtreme embarrassment I at last rendered “The 
Man on the Flying. Trapeze”! They were very polite about 
it. No encore v'as requested. 

With infinite relief I saw the curtain go up on the next 
act, which mrned out to be a social plav with a revolution- 
ary theme — an accountant who fell in love with his land- 
lord’s wife. Then there was more dancing, a “Living News- 
paper” dealing with some late news from the South-west, 
and a chorus of children singing the “International.” Here 
the flags of several nations were hung on streamers from a 
central illuminated column, round which reclined the 
young dancers. They rose slowly, as the words unfolded, 
to stand erect, clenched fists upraised, as the song ended. 

The theatre was over, but my curiosity remained. And 
thus, next day, I went to interview Miss Wei Kung-chih, 
director of the People’s Anti-Japanese Dramatic Society. 

Miss Wei was born in Honan in 1907 and had been a 
Red for ten years. She originally joined a propaganda corps 
of the Kuominchun, “Cliristian General” Feng Yii-hsiang’s 
army, but when Feng reconciled himself to the Nanking 
coup d’etat in 1927 she deserted, along with many young 
students, and became a Communist in Hankow. In 1929, 
she was sent to Europe by the Communist Party, and stud- 
ied for a while in France, and then in Moscow. A year 
later she returned to China, successfully ran the Kuomin- 
tang blockade around Red China, and began to work at 
Juichin. 



1 14 IN “defenped peace” 

She told me something of the history of the Red The- 
atre. Dramatic groups were first oi'ganized in Kiangsi, it 
seems, in 1931. There, at the famous Gorky School in 
Juichin, with over 1,000 students recruited from the Soviet 
districts, the Reds trained about sixty theatrical troupes, 
according to Miss Wei. They travelled through the vil- 
lages and at the front. Every troupe had long waiting lists 
of requests from village Soviets. The peasants, always grate- 
ful for any diversion in their culture-starved lives, volun- 
taril)^ arranged all transport, food and housing for these 
visits. 

In the South, Miss Wei was an assistant dkector, but in 
the Northwest she had taken charge of the vidiole organiza- 
tion of dramatics. She made the Long March from Kiangsi, 
one of several scores of Soviet women who lived through it. 
Theatrical troupes were created in Soviet Shensi before the 
southern army reached the North-west, but with the ar- 
rival of new talent from Kiangsi the dramatic art appar- 
ently acquired new life. There were over thirty such travel- 
ling theatrical troupes there now, Miss Wei told me, and 
others in Kansu. I was to meet 'many later on in my travels. 

“Every army has its own dramatic group,” Miss Wei 
continued, “as well as nearly every district. The actors are 
nearly all locally recruited. Most of our experienced play- 
ers from the South have now become instructors.” 

I met .several Young Vanguards, veterans of the Long 
March, still in their early teens, who had charge of organiz- 
ing and training childrens’ dramatic societies in various vil- 
lages. 

“Peasants come from long distances to our Red dra- 
matics,” Miss Wei proudly informed me. “Sometimes, 
when Ave are near the White borders, Kuomintang soldiers 
secretly send messages to ask our players to come to some 
market-town in the border districts. When we do this, both 
Red soldiers and White leave their arms behind and go to 



RED THEATRE 


”5 

this market-place to watch our performance. But the higher 
officers of the Kuomintang never permit this, if they know 
about it, because once they have seen our players many of 
the Kuomintang soldiers will no longer fight our Red 
Army!” 

What surprised me about these dramatic clubs, how- 
ever, was not that they offered anything of artistic im- 
portance to the world, which obviously they did not, but 
that, equipped with so little, they were able to meet a 
genuine social need. They had the scantiest properties and 
costumes, yet with these primitive materials they managed 
to produce the authentic illusion of drama. The players 
received only their food and clothing and small living al- 
lowances, but they studied every day, like all Communists, 
and they believed themselves to be working for China and 
the Chinese people. They slept anywhere, cheerfully ate 
what was provided for them, walked long distances from 
village to village. From the standpoint of material comforts 
they were unquestionably the most miserably rewarded 
thespians on earth, yet I don’t seem to have seen any who 
were happier. 

The Reds write nearly all their own plays and songs. 
Some are contributed by versatile officials, but most of 
them are prepared by story-writers and artists in the propa- 
ganda department. Several Red dramatic skits have been 
written by Chen Fang-wm, the great literary critic who 
joined the Reds three years ago, and others, more recently, 
by Ting Ling, China’s most famous woman author, who 
is now with the Red Army. 

There is no more powerful weapon of propaganda in 
the Communist movement than the Reds’ dramatic troupes, 
and none more subtly manipulated. By constant shifts of 
programme, by almost daily changes of the “Living News- 
paper” scenes, new military, political, economic and social 
problems become the material of drama, and doubts and 


Il6 IN “defended peace” i 

questionings are answered in a humorous, understandable 
way for the sceptical peasantry. When the Reds occupy 
new areas, too, it is the Red Theatre which calms the fears 
of the people, gives them rudimentary ideas of the Red 
programme, dispenses great quantities of revolutionary 
ideas, and counter-propaganda, to win the people’s confi- 
dence. During the Reds’ recent Shansi expedition, for ex- 
ample, hundreds of peasants heard about the Red players 
with the army, and flocked to see them, willing subjects for 
any propaganda dispensed in the pleasant form of drama. 

i 

The whole thing is “propaganda in art” carried to the 
ultimate degree, and plenty of people would say, “Why 
drag art into it?” Yet in its broadest meaning it is art, for 
it conveys for its spectators the illusions of life, and if it is 
a naive art it is because the living material with which it is 
made and the living men to whom it appeals are in their 
approach to life’s problems also naive. For the masses of 
China there, is no fine partition between art and propa- 
ganda. There is only a distinction betw^een what is under- 
standable in human experience and what is not. 

You know in one sense you can think of the whole his- 
tory of the Communist movement in China as a grand 
propaganda tour, and the defence, not so much of the ab- 
solute right of certain ideas, perhaps, as of their right to 
exist. I’m not sure that it may not prove to have been the 
most permanent service of the Reds, even if' they are in 
the end defeated and broken. For millions of , young peas- 
ants who have heard the Marxist gospel preached by those 
beardless youths, thousands of whom are now dead, the 
old exorcisms of Chinese culture will never again be quite 
as effective. Wherever in their incredible migrations des- 
tiny has moved these Reds, they have vigorously demanded 
deep social changes — for which the peasants could have 



RED THEATRE 


”7 

learned to hope in no other way — and have brought new 
faith in action to the poor and the oppressed. 

However badly they have erred at times, however 
tragic have been their excesses, however exaggerated has 
been the emphasis here or the stress there, it has been their 
sincere and sharply felt propagandist aim to shake, to 
arouse, the millions of rural China to their responsibilities 
in society; to awaken them to a belief in human’ rights, to 
combat the timidity, passiveness and static faiths of Taoism 
and Confucianism, to educate, to persuade and, I have no 
doubt, at times to beleaguer and coerce them to fight for 
“the reign of the people” — a new vision in rural China — to 
fight for a life of justice, equality, freedom and human 
dignity, as the Communists see it. Far more than all the 
pious but meaningless resolutions passed at Nanking, this 
growing pressure now from a peasantry gradually standing 
erect in a state of consciousness, after two millenniums of 
sleep may force the realization of a vast mutation over the 
land. 

What this “Communism” has amounted to in a way is 
that, for the first time in history, thousands of educated 
youths, stirred to great dreams themselves by a universe 
of scientific knowledge to which they have suddenly been 
given access, have “returned to the people,” turned back to 
'the deep soil-base of their country, to “reveal” some of 
their new-won learning to the intellectually sterile country- 
side, the dark-living peasantry, and have sought to enlist 
its alliance in building this “more abundant life.” Fired by 
the belief that a better world can be made, and that only 
they can make it, they have carried their formula — the ideal 
of the commune — ^back to the people for sanction and sup- 
port. And to a startling degree they have won it. They 
have brought to millions, by propaganda and by action, a 
new conception of the State, society and the individual. 



Il8 IN “defended peace” 

I often had a queer feeling among the Reds that I was 
in the midst of a host of schoolboys, engaged in a life of 
violence because some strange design of history had made 
this seem infinitely more important to them than football 
games, text-books, love, or the main concerns of youth in 
other countries. At times I could scarcely believe that it 
had been only this determined aggregation of youth, 
equipped with an Idea, that had directed a mass struggle 
for ten years against all the armies of Nanking. How had 
the incredible brotherhood arisen, banded together, held 
together, and whence came its strength? And why had it 
perhaps, after all, failed to mature, why did it still seem 
fundamentally like a mighty demonstration, like a crusade, 
of youth? 

This can be answered only when you understand the 
remarkable gestation through which Chinese history has 
gone during the past quarter of a century — a gestation the 
legitimate offspring of which clearly is this Red Army. For 
hundreds of }"ears the literate men of China have striven 
to rise above the people, win access to the little bureaucracy 
which from a distant height ruled the masses — by closely 
guarding its hieroglyphics and its knowledge, and using 
these as weapons with which to control the darkness of the 
countryside, but never to enlighten it. But the new gesta- 
tion produced a phenomenon — a child that wanted to share 
its knowledge with the “dark masses” and even idealize 
them. 

I used to wonder, while I was in Pao An, how I could 
possibly explain this profound natural disturbance that has 
shaken the womb of China. How could I describe the slow 
fertilization, the quickening of the womb, the pain of birth, 
and the result? I could list the bare historic facts; but the 
human anguish of it I could not describe. Then Mao Tse- 
tung began to tell me something about his personal history, 
and as 1 wrote it down, night after night, I realized that 



RED THEATRE 


I 19 

this was not only his story, but a record also of how Com- 
munism grew — a variety of it real and indigenous to China, 
and no mere orphan adopted from abroad, as some writers 
naively suppose — and why it won the adherence and sup- 
port of thousands of young men and women. It was a story 
that I was to hear later on, with rich variations, in the 
autobiographies of many other Red leaders. It was a story 
people would want to read, I thought. And here it is. 






PART FOUR: GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

1 

Childhood 

< > 

I HAD given to iMao a long list of questions to answer 
about himself, and I felt almost as embarrassed for my 
inquisitiveness as a Japanese immigration official ought to 
feel for his impertinence, but doesn’t. On the five or six 
sets of questions I had submitted on different matters, Mao 
had talked for a dozen nights, hardly ever referring to him- 
self or his own role in some of the events described. I was- 
beginning to think it was hopeless to expect him to give 
me such details: he obviously considered the individual of 
very little importance. Like other Reds I met he tended to 
talk only about committees, organizations, armies, resolu- 
tions, battles, tactics, “measures” and so on, but seldom in 
terms of personal experience. 

For awhile I thought this reluctance to expand on sub- 
jective matters, or even the exploits of their comrades as 
individuals, might derive from modesty, or a fear or sus- 
picion of me, or a consciousness of the price so many of 
these men had on their heads. Later on I discovered that 
this was not so much the case as was the fact that most of 
them actually did not remember these personal details. As 
I began collecting biographies I found repeatedly that the 
Communist would be able to tell everj’^thing that had hap- 

I2I 



122 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

pened in his early youth, but once he had become identified 
with the Red Army he lost himiself somewhere, and with- 
out repeated questioning you could hear nothing more 
about him, but only stories of the Army, or the Soviets, 
or the Party — capitalized. They could talk indefinitely 
about dates and circumstances of battles, and movements 
to and from a thousand unheard-of places, but those events 
seemed to have had significance for them only collectively, 
not because they as individuals had made history there, but 
because the Red Army had been there, and behind it the 
whole organic force of an ideology for which they were 
fighting. It was an interesting discovery, but it made diffi- 
cult reporting. 

One night when all other questions had been satisfied, 
Mao turned to this list I had headed “Personal Plistory.” 
He smiled at a question, “How many times have you been 
married?” — and the rumour later spread that I had asked 
Mao how many wives he had. He was sceptical, anyv^ay, 
about the necessity for supplying an autobiography. But I 
argued that in a way this was more important than informa- 
tion on other matters. “People want to know what sort of 
man you are,” I said, “when they read what you say. Then 
you ought also to correct some of the false rumours cir- 
culated.” 

I reminded him of various reports of his death, how 
some people believed he spoke fluent French, while others 
said he was an ignorant peasant, how one report described 
him as a half-dead tubercular, while others maintained that 
he was a mad fanatic. He was mildly surprised that people 
should spend their time speculating about him. He agreed 
that such reports ought to be corrected. Then he looked 
over the items again, as I had written them down. 

“Suppose,” he said at last, “that I just disregard your 
questions, and instead give you a general sketch of my life? 



CHILDHOOD 123 

I think it will be more understandable, and in the end all 
of your questions will be answered just the same.” 

“But that’s exactly what I want!” I exclaimed. 

. During the several nightly interviews that followed — 
we were like conspirators indeed, huddled in that cave over 
that red-covered table, ti'idi sputtering candles between 
us — I wrote until I was ready to fall asleep. Wu Liang-p’ing 
sat next to me and interpreted Mao’s soft southern dialect, 
in which a chicken, instead of being a good substantial 
northern chi became a romantic ghii, and Himan became 
Ftman, and a bowl of c/j’ar turned into ts'a, and many much 
stranger variations occurred. Mao related everything from 
memory, and I put it down as he talked. It was, as I have 
said, re-translated and corrected, and this is the result, with 
no attempt to give it literary e.xcellence, beyond some nec- 
essary corrections in the syntax of the patient Mr. Wu: 

“I was born in the village of Shao Shan, in Hsiang T’an 
Hsien, Hunan province, in 1893. M)'- father’s name was 
Mao Jen-sheng, and my mother’s maiden name was Wen 
Ch’i-mei. 

“My father was a poor peasant and while still young 
was obliged to join the army because of heavy debts. He 
was a soldier for many years. Later on he returned to the 
village where I was born, and by saving carefully and gath- 
ering together a little mone)’- through small trading and 
other enterprise he managed to buy back his land. 

“As middle peasants then my family owned fifteen 7mu 
of land. On this they could raise sixty taiF of rice a year. 
The five members of the family consumed a total of thirty- 
five tan — ^that is, about seven each — ^tvhich left an annual 
surplus of uventy-five tan. Using this surplus, my father 
accumulated a little capital and in time purchased seven 
more moii, which gave the family the status of ‘rich’ peas- 
ants. We could then raise eighty-four tccn of rice a year. 

^ One tan is a picul, or 133’/^ lbs. 



124 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

“When I was ten years of age and the family owned 
only fifteen mou of land, the five members of the family 
consisted of my father, mother, grandfather, younger 
brother and myself. After we had acquired the additional 
seven moii, my grandfather died, but there came another 
younger brother. However, we still had a surplus of forty- 
nine tan of rice each yejir, and on this my father steadily 
prospered. ^ 

“At the time my father was a middle peasant he began 
to deal in grain transport and selling, by which he made a 
little money. After he became a ‘rich’ peasant, he devoted 
most of his time to that business. He hired a full-time farm 
labourer, and put his children to work on the farm, as well 
as his wife. I began to work at farming tasks when I was 
six years old. My father had no shop, for his business. 'He 
simply purchased grain from the poor farmers and then 
transported it to the city merchants, where he got a higher 
price. In the winter, when the rice was being ground, he 
hired an extra labourer to work on the farm, so that at that 
time there were seven mouths to feed. My family ate 
frugally, but had enough always. 

“I began studying in a local primary school when I was 
eight and remained there until I was thirteen years old. In 
the early morning and at night I worked on the farm. Dur- ' 
mg the day I read the Confucian Analects and the Four 
Classics. My Chinese teacher belonged to the stern-treat- 
ment school. He was harsh and severe, frequently beating 
his students. Because of this I ran away from the school 
when I was ten. I was afraid to return home, for fear of 
receiving a beating there, and set out in the general direc- 
tion of the city, which I believed to be in a valley some- 
where. I wandered for three days before I was finally found 
by my family. Then I learned that I had circled round and 
round in my travels, and in all my walking had got only 
about eight li from my home. 



CHILDHOOD 


125 

“After my return to the family, however, to my sur- 
prise, conditions somewhat improved. My father was 
slightly more considerate and the teacher was more in- 
clined to moderation. The result of my act of protest im- 
pressed me very much. It was a successful ‘strike.’ 

“My father wanted me to begin keeping the family 
books as soon as I had learned a few characters. He wanted 
me to learn to use the abacus. As my father insisted upon 
this I began to work at those accounts at night. He, was a 
severe taskmaster. He hated to see me idle, and if there 
were no books to be kept he put me to work at farm tasks. 
He was a hot-tempered man and frequently beat both me 
and my brothers. He gave us no money whatever, and the 
most meagre food. On the 1 5th of every month he made a 
concession to his labourers and gave them eggs with their 
rice, but never meat. To me he gave neither eggs nor meat. 

“My mother was a kind \voman, generous and sympa- 
thetic, and ever ready to share what she had. She pitied the 
poor and often gave them rice when they came to ask for 
it during famines. But she could not do so when my father 
was present. He disapproved of charity. We had many 
quarrels in my home over this question. 

“There were two ‘parties’ in the family. One was my 
father, the Ruling Power. The Opposition was made up of 
myself, my mother, my brother and sometimes even the 
labourer. In the ‘United Front’ of the Opposition, how- 
ever, there was a difference of opinion. My mother advo- 
cated a policy of indirect attack. She criticized any overt 
display of emotion and attempts at open rebellion against 
the Ruling Power. She said it was not the Chinese way. 

“But when I was thirteen I discovered a powerful argu- 
ment of my own for debating with my father on his own 
ground, by quoting the Classics. My father’s favourite ac- 
cusations against me were of unfilial conduct and laziness. 
I quoted, in exchange, passages from the Classics saying 



126 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

that the elder must be kind and affectionate. Against his 
charge that I was lazy, I used the rebuttal that older people 
should do more work than younger, that my father v/as 
over three times as old as myself, and therefore should do 
more work. And I declared that when I was his age I would 
be much more energetic. 

“The old man continued to ‘amass wealth,’ or what was 
considered to be a great fortune in that little village. He 
did not buy more land himself, but he bought many mort- 
gages on other people’s land. His capital grew to $2,000 or 
•$3,000. 

“My dissatisfaction increased. The dialectical struggle 
in our family was constantly developing.’^ One incident I 
especially remember. When I was about thirteen my father 
invited many guests to his home, and while they were pres- 
ent a dispute arose between the two of us. My father de- 
nounced me before the whole group, calling me lazy and 
useless. This infuriated me. I cursed him and left the house. 
My mother ran after me and tried to persuade me to return. 
My father also pursued me; cursing at the sqme time that 
he demanded me to come back. I jreached the edge of a 
pond and threatened to jump in if he came any nearer. In 
this situation demands and counter-demands were pre- 
sented for cessation of the civil war. My father insisted that 
I apologize and k’oii-t'oii as a sign of submission. I agreed 
to give a- one-knee k'ou-t'oii if he would promise not to 
beat me. Thus the war ended, and from it I learned that 
when I defended my rights by open rebellion my father 
relented, but when I remained meek and submissive he only 
cursed and beat me the more. 

“Reflecting on this, I think that in the end the strictness 
of my father defeated him. I learned to hate him, and we 
created a real United Front against him. At the same time 

^ Mao used all these political terms humorously in his explanations, 
laughing as he recalled such incidents. 



CHILDHOOD 


127 

it probably benefited me. It made me most diligent in my 
work; it made me keep my books carefull)’-, so that he 
should have no basis for criticizing me. 

“My father had had two years of schooling and he ' 
could read enough to keep books. My mother was wholly 
illiterate. Both were from peasant families. I was the family 
‘scholar.’ I knew the Classics, but disliked them. \¥hat I 
enjoyed were the romances of Old China, and especially 
stories of rebellions. I read the Vo Fei Chiian {Chin Clnmg 
Chnan), Shiii Hu Chuan, Fan T'ang, San Kuo, and Hsi Yu 
Chi, while still very young, and despite the vigilance of 
my old teacher, who hated these outlav'ed books and called 
them wicked. I used to read them in school, covering them 
up with a Classic when the teacher walked past. So also did 
most of my schoolmates. We learned many of the stories 
almost by heart, and discussed and rediscussed them many 
times. 'We knew more of them than the old men of the 
village, who also loved them and used to exchange stories 
with us. I believe that perhaps I was much influenced by 
such books, read at an impressionable age. 

“I finally left the primary school when I was thirteen 
and began to work long hours on the farm, helping the 
hired labourer, doing the full labour of a man during the 
day and at night keeping books for my father. Neverthe- 
less, I succeeded in continuing my reading, devouring 
everything I could find except the Classics. This annoyed 
my father, who wanted me to master the Classics, especially 
after he was defeated in a lawsuit due to an apt Classical 
quotation used by his adversary in the Chinese court. I 
used to cover up the window of my room late at night so 
that my father \yould not see the light. In this v^ay I read 
a book called Words of Waniing {Sben Shib Wei-yen), 
which I liked very much. The authors, a number of old 
reformist scholars, thought that the tveakness of China lay 
in her lack of IVestern appliances — railways, telephones, 



128 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

telegraphs and steamships — and wanted to have them intro- 
duced into the country. My father considered such books a 
waste of time. He wanted me to read something practical 
like the Classics, which could help him in winning lawsuits. 

“I continued to read the old romances and tales of Chi- 
nese literature. It occurred to me, one day that there was 
one thing peculiar about these stories, and that was the 
absence of peasants who tilled the land. All the characters 
were warriors, officials or scholars; there was never a peas- 
ant hero. I wondered about this for two years, and then 
I analyzed the content of the stories. I found that they all 
glorified men of arms, rulers of the people, who did not 
have to work the land, because they owned and controlled 
it and evidently made the peasants work it for them. 

“My father, Mao Jen-sheng, was in his early days, and 
in middle age, a sceptic, but my mother devoutly wor- 
shipped Buddha. She gave her children religious instruc-. 
tion, and we were all saddened that our father was an un- 
believer. When I was nine years old I seriously discussed 
the problem of my father’s lack of piety .with my mother. 
We made many attempts then and later on to convert him, 
but without success. He only cursed us, and, overwhelmed 
by his attacks, we withdrew to devise new plans., But he 
would have nothing to do with the gods. 

“My' reading gradually began to influence me, however; 
I myself became more and more sceptical. My mother be- 
came concerned about me, and scolded me for my indif- 
ference to the requirements of the faith, but my father 
made no comment. Then one day he went out on the road 
to collect some money, and on his way he met a tiger. The 
tiger was surprised at the encounter and fled at once, but 
my father was even more astonished and afterwards re- 
flected a good deal on his miraculous escape. He began to 
wonder if he had not offended the gods. From then on he 
showed more respect to Buddhism and burned incense now 



CHILDHOOD 


129 

and then. Yet, when my own backsliding grew worse, the 
old man did not incerfere. He only prayed to the gods 
when he was in difficulties. 

“Wo?'ds of Warning stimulated in me a desire to resume 
my studies. I had also become disgusted with my labour 
on the farm. My father naturally opposed this. We quar- 
relled about it, and finally I ran away from home. I went 
to the home of an unemployed law student, and there I 
studied for half a year. After that I studied more of the 
Classics under an old Chinese scholar, and also read many 
contemporary articles and a few books. 

“At this time an incident occurred in Hunan which in- 
fluenced my whole life. Outside the little Chinese school 
where I was studying, we students noticed many bean 
merchants, coming back from Changsha. We asked them 
why they were all leaving. They told us about a big up- 
rising in the city. 

“There had been a severe famine that year, and in 
Changsha thousands were without food. The starving sent 
a delegation to the civil governor, to beg for relief, but he 
replied to them haughtily, ‘Why haven’t you food? There 
is plenty in the city. I always have enough.’ When the 
people were told the governor’s reply, they became ver)’- 
angry. They held mass meetings and organized a demon- 
stration. They attacked the Manchu yamen, cut down the 
flagpole, the symbol of office, and drove out the governor. 
Following this, the Commissioner of Internal Affairs, a man 
named Chang, came out on his horse and told the people 
that the Government would take measures to help them. 
Chang was evidently sincere in his promise, but the Em- 
peror disliked him and accused him of having intimate 
connections with ‘the mob.’ He was removed. A new ^ov- 
ernor arrived, and at once ordered the arrest of the leaders 
of the uprising. Many of them were beheaded and their 
heads displayed on poles as a warning to future ‘rebels.’ 



130 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

“This incident was discussed in my school for many 
days. It made a deep impression on me. Most of the other 
students sympathized with the ‘insurrectionists,’ but only 
from an observer’s point of view. They did not understand 
that it had any relation to their own lives. They were 
merely interested in it as an exciting incident. I never for- 
got it. I felt that there with the rebels were ordinary people 
like my own family and I deeply resented the injustice of 
the treatment given to them. 

“Not long afterward, in Shao Shan, there was a conflict 
between members of the Ke Lao Hui,’^ a secret society, and 
a local landlord. He sued them in court, and as he was a 
powerful landlord he easily bought a decision favourable 
to himself. The Ke Lao Hui members were defeated. But, 
instead of submitting, they rebelled against the landlord 
and the Government and withdrew to a local mountain 
called Liu Shan, where they built a sti’onghold. Troops 
were sent against them and the landlord spread a story that 
they had sacrificed a child when they raised the banner of 
revolt. The leader of the rebels was called P’ang the Mill- 
stone-maker. They were finally suppressed and P’ang was 
forced to flee. He was eventually captured and beheaded. 
In the eyes of the students, however, he \^'as a hero, for all 
sympathized with the revolt. 

“Next year, when the new rice was not yet harvested 
and the winter rice was exhausted, there was a food short- 
age in our district. The poor demanded help from the rich 
farmers and they began a movement called ‘Eat Rice With- 
out Charge.’ My father was a rice merchant and was ex- 
porting much grain to the city from our district, despite 
the shortage. One of his consignments was seized by the 
poor villagers and his wrath was boundless. I did not sym- 
pathize uTth him. At the same time I thought the villagers’ 
method was wrong also. 

^ The same society to which Ho Lung belonged. 



CHILDHOOD 13 1 

“Another influence on me at this time was the presence 
in a local primary school of a ‘radical’ teacher. He was 
‘radical’ because he was opposed to Buddhism, and "wanted 
to get rid of the gods. He urged people to convert their 
temples into schools. He was a widely discussed person- 
ality. I admired him and agreed with his views. 

“These incidents, occurring close together, made last- 
ing impressions on my young mind, already rebellious. In 
this period also I began to have a certain amount of politi- 
cal consciousness, especially after I read a pamphlet telling 
of the dismemberment of China. I remember even now that 
this pamphlet opened with the sentence: ‘Alas, China "svill 
be subjugated!’ It told of Japan’s occupation of Korea and 
Formosa, of the loss of suzerainty in Indo-China, . Burma 
and elsewhere. After I read this I felt depressed about the 
future of my countr)’" and began to realize that it was the 
duty of all the people to help save it. 

“My father had decided to apprentice me to a rice shop 
in Hsiang T’an, with which he had connections. I was not 
opposed to it at first, thinking it might be interesting. But 
about this time I heard of an unusual new school and made 
up my mind to go there, despite my father’s opposition. 
This school was in Hsiang Hsiang hsien (county), v/here 
my mother’s family lived. A cousin of mine was a student 
there and he told me of the new school and of the changing 
conditions in ‘modern education.’ There was less emphasis 
on the Classics, and more was taught of the ‘nev' knowledge’ 
of the West. The educational methods, also, were quite 
‘radical.’ 

“I went to the school with my cousin and registered. I 
claimed to be a Hsiang Hsiang man,, because I understood 
that the school was open only to natives of Hsiang FIsiang. 
Later on I took my true status as a Hsiang T’an native when 
I discovered that the place was open to all. I paid 1,400 cop- 
pers here for five months’ board, lodging, and all materials 



132 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

necessary for study. My father finally agreed to let me en- 
ter, after friends had argued to him that this ‘advanced’ 
education would increase my earning powers. This was the 
first time I had been as far away from home as fifty lu I 
was sixteen years old. 

“In the new school I could study natural science and 
new subjects of Western learning. Another notable thing 
was that one of the teachers was a returned student from 
Japan, and he wore a false queue. It was quite easy to tell 
that his queue was false. Everyone laughed at him and 
called him the ‘False Foreign Devil.’ 

“I had never before seen so many children together. 
Most of them were sons of landlords, wearing expensive 
clothes; very few peasants could afford to send their chil- 
dren to such a school. I was more poorly dressed than the 
others. I owned only one decent coat-and-trousers suit. 
Gowns were not worn by students, but only by the teach- 
ers, and none but ‘foreign devils’ wore foreign clothes. 
Many of the richer students despised me because usually 
I was wearing my ragged coat and trousers. However, 
among them I had friends, and two especially were my 
good comrades. One of those is now a writer, living in 
Soviet Russia. 

“I was also disliked because I was not a native of Hsiang 
Hsiang. It was very important to be a native of Hsiang 
Hsiang and also important to be from a certain district of 
Hsiang Hsiang. There was an upper, lower and middle dis- 
trict, and lower and upper were continually fighting, purely 
on a regional basis. Neither could become reconciled to 
the existence of the other. I took a neutral position in this 
war, because I was not a native at all. Consequently all three 
factions despised me. I felt spiritually very depressed. 

“I made good progress at this school. Tlie teachers liked 
me, especially those who taught the Classics, because I 
wrote good essays in the Classical manner. But my mind 



CHILDHOOD 133 

was not on the Classics. I was readinij two books sent to me 
by my cousin, telling of the Reform movement of K’ang 
Yu-wei. One was called the Journal of the New People 
(Hsin Min Chung Pao), and was edited by Liang Ch’i- 
ch’ao.’^ I read and re-read these until I knew them by heart. 
I worshipped K’ang Yu-wei and Liang Ch’i-ch’ao, and was 
very grateful to my cousin, whom I then thought very 
progressive, but who later became a counter-revolutionarv’-, 
a member of the gentry, and joined the reactionaries in the 
period of the Great Revolution of 1925-1927. 

“iMany of the students disliked the ‘False Foreign 
Devil’ because of his inhuman queue, but I liked hearing 
him talk about Japan. He taught music and English. One 
of his songs was Japanese and was called ‘The Battle on the 
Yellow Sea.’ I still remember some charminsf words from it: 

The sparrow sings, 

The nightingale dances. 

And the green fields are lovely in the spring. 

The pomegranate flowers crimson. 

The willows are green-leaved. 

And there is a new picture. 

At that time I knew and felt the beauty of Japan, and felt 
something of her pride and might, in this song of her vic- 
tory over Russia." I did not think there was also a barbarous 
Japan — the Japan we know today. 

“This is all I learned from the ‘False Foreign Devil.’ 

“I recall also that at this time I first heard that the Em- 
peror and Tzu Hsi, the Empress Dowager, were, both dead, 

^ Liang Ch’i-ch’ao, a talented essayist at the end of the Manchu 
dynast}^ vas the leader of a reform movement which resulted in his 
c.xilc. K’ang Yu-wei and he were the “intellectual godfathers’’ of the 
first revolution, in 1911. Lin Yu-t’ang calls Liang Ch’i-ch’ao “the 
greatest pcrsonaliw in the history of Chinese journalism.’’ 

-The poem evidently referred to the spring fcstiv.al and tremen- 
dous rejoicing in Japan following the Treat}' of Portsmouth and the 
end of the Russo-Japanese \^'^ar. 



134 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

although the new Emperor, Hsuan Tung [the present P’u 
YiJ, had already been ruling for two years. I was not yet an 
anti-monarchist; indeed, I considered the Emperor as well 
as most officials to be honest, good and clever men. They 
only needed the help of K’ang Yu-wei’s reforms. I was fas- 
cinated by accounts of the rulers of ancient China: Yao, 
Shun, Ch’in Shih Fluang-ti, and Han Wu-ti, and read many 
books about them. I also learned something of foreign his- 
tory at this time, and of geography. I had first heard of 
America in an article which told of the American Revolu- 
tion and contained a sentence like this: ‘After eight years 
of difficult war, Washington won victory and built up his 
nation.’ In a book called Great Heroes of the World, I read 
also of Napoleon, Catherine of Russia, Peter, the Great, 
Wellington, Gladstone, Rousseau, Montesquieu and 
Lincoln.” 



Days in Changsha 


-Ik 

4, /TAO TSE-TUNG continued: 

-Lvi “I began to long to go to Changsha, the great city, 
the capital of the province, which was 120 // from my. home. 
It was said that this city was very big, contained many, 
many people, numerous schools, and the )-amcn of the 
governor. It was a magnificent place altogether! I wanted 
very much to go there at this time, and enter the middle 
school for Hsiang Hsiang people. That winter I asked one 
of my teachers in the higher primary school to introduce 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA 


135 

me there. The teacher agreed, and I walked to Changsha, 
exceedingly excited, half-fearing that I would be refused 
entrance, hardly daring to hope that I could actually be- 
come a student in this great school. To my astonishment, 
I was admitted without difficulty. But political events were 
moving rapidly and I was to remain there only half a year. 

“In Changsha I read my first newspaper, the People's 
Strength {Min Li Pao), a nationalist revolutionary'^ journal 
which told of the Canton Uprising against the Manchu 
dynasty and the death of the Seventy-two Heroes, under 
the leadership of a Hunanese, named Wang Hsing. I v'as 
most impressed v'ith this story and found the Mm Li Pao 
full of stimulating material. It was edited by Yii Yu-jen, 
M'ho later became a famous leader of the Kuomintang. I 
learned also of Sun Yat-sen at this time, and of the program 
of the T’ung Meng Hui. The country'- was on the eve of 
the First Revolution. I was agitated so much that I rvrote 
an article, which I posted on the school wall. It was my'- first 
expression of a political opinion, and it was somewhat 
muddled. I had not y'et given up my admiration of K’ang 
Yu-wei and Liang Ch’i-ch’ao. I did not clearly'- understand 
the differences between them. Therefore in my' article I 
advocated that Sun Yat-sen must be called back from Japan 
to become President of a new Government, that K’ang 
Yu-wei be made Premier, and Liang Chi’i-ch’ao Minister 
of Foreign Affairs! 

“The anti-foreign capital movement began in connec- 
tion with the building of the Szechuan-Hankow railway 
and a popular demand for a parliament became widespread. 
In reply' to it the Emperor decreed merely' that an Advisory' 
Council be created. The students in my' school became 
more and more agitated. They' demonstrated their anti- 
Manchu sentiments by' a rebellion against the pigtail. One 
friend and I clipped off our pigtails, but others, who had 
promised to do so, afterward failed to keep their word. My 



Ij6 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

friend and I therefore assaulted them in secret and forcibly 
removed their queues, a total of more than ten falling vic- 
tim to our shears. Thus in a short space of time I had pro- 
gressed from ridiculing the False Foreign Devil’s imitation 
queue to demanding the general abolition of queues. How 
a political idea can change a point of view! 

“I got into a dispute with a friend in a law school over 
the pigtail episode, and we each advanced opposing theories 
on the subject. The law student held that the body, skin, 
hair and nails are heritages from one’s parents and must not 
be destroyed, quoting the Classics to clinch his ai'gument. 
But I myself and the anti-pigtailers developed a counter- 
theory, on an anti-Manchu political basis, and thoroughly 
silenced him. 

“After the Wuhan Uprising occurred, led by Li Yuan- 
hung, martial law was declared in Hunan. The political 
scene rapidly altered. One day a revolutionary appeared in 
the middle school and made a stirring speech, with the 
permission of the principal. Seven or eight students arose 
in the assembly and supported him with vigorous denuncia- 
tion of the Manchus, and calls for action to establish the 
Republic. Everyone listened with complete attention. Not 
a sound was heard as the orator of the revolution, one of 
the’ officials of Li Yuan-hung, spoke before the excited 
students. 

“Four or five days after hearing this speech, I deter- 
mined to join the revolutionary army of Li Yuan-hung. I 
liecided to go to Hankow with several other friends, and 
we collected some money from our classmates. Having 
heard that the streets of Hankow were very wet, and that 
it was necessary to wear rain-shoes, I went to borrow some 
from a friend in the army, who was quartered outside the 
city. I was stopped by the garrison guards. The place had 
become very active, the soldiers had for the first time been 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA 1 37 

furnished with bullets, and they were pouring into the 
streets. 

“Rebels were approaching the city along the Canton- 
Hankow railway, and fighting had begun. A big battle 
occurred outside the city walls of Changsha. There was at 
the same time an insurrection within the city, and the gates 
were stormed and taken by Chinese labourers. Through 
one of them I re-entered the city. Tlien I stood on a high 
place and watched the battle, until at last I saw the Half 
flag raised over the yamen. It was a white banner with the 
character Haji in it. I returned to my school, to find it un- 
der military guard. ^ 

“On the following day, a tutulf government was organ- 
, ized. Two prominent members of the Ke Lao Hui were 
made tntuh and vict-mtuh. These were Chao Ta-feng and 
Chen Tso-hsing, respectively. The new government was 
established in the former buildings of the Provincial Ad- 
visory Council, chief of wdiich was T’an Yen-k’ai, who was 
dismissed. The Council itself was abolished. Among the 
Manchu documents found by the revolutionaries were 
■some copies of a petition begging for the opening of parlia- 
ment. The original had been written in blood by Hsu Teh- 
lih, who is now Commissioner of Education in the Soviet 
Government. Hsu had cut off . the end of his finger, as a 
demonstration of sincerity and determination, and his pe- 
tition began, ‘Begging that parliament be opened, I bid fare- 
well [to the provincial delegates to Peking] by cutting my 
finger.’ 

“The new tutuh and vice-tidiih did not last long. They 
•were not bad men, and had some revolutionary intentions, 
but they were poor and represented the interests of the 
■oppressed. The landlords and merchants were dissatisfied 

Hail, i.e., Chinese. 

- A tiituh was a military governor. 



138 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

with them. Not many days later, when I went to call on 
a friend, I saw their corpses lying in the street. T’an Yen- 
k’ai had organized a revolt against theiii, as representative 
of the Hunan landlords and militarists, 

“Many students were now joining the army. A student 
army had been organized and among these students was 
Tang Sheng-chih.^ I did not like the student army; I con- 
sidered the basis of it' too confused. I decided to join the 
regular army instead, and help complete the revolution. 
The Ch’ing Emperor had not yet abdicated, and there was 
a period of struggle. 

“My salary was seven dollars a month — ^which is more 
than I get in the Red Army now, however — and of this I 
spent two dollars a month on food. I also had to buy water. 
The soldiers had to carry water in from outside the city, 
but I, being a student, could not condescend to carrying, 
and bought it from the water-pedlars. The rest of my 
wages were spent on newspapers, of which I became an 
avid reader. Among journals then dealing with the revolu- 
tion was the Hsiang Kiang Daily News {Hsiang Kiang 
Erh Pao). Socialism was discussed in it, and in these col- 
umns I first learned the term. I also discussed Socialism, 
really social-reformism, with other students and soldiers. 
I read some pamphlets written by Kiang K’ang-hu about 
Socialism and its principles. I wrote enthusiastically to sev- 
eral of my classmates on this subject, but only one of them 
responded in agreement. 

“There was a Hunan miner in my squad, and an iron- 
smith, whom I liked ver}i" much. The rest were mediocre, 
and one was a rascal, I persuaded two more students to 
join the army, and became on friendly terms with the 

^T’ang Shcng-chih later became commander of the Nationalist 
armies of the Wuhan Government of Wang Ching-wei, in 1927. He 
betrayed both Wang and the Reds and began the “peasant massacre”' 
of Hunan. 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA 


139 

platoon commander and most of the soldiers. 1 could v.-rite, 
I knew something about books, and they respected my 
‘Great Learning.’ I could help by writing letters for them 
or, in other such ways. 

“The outcome of the revolution was not yet decided. 
The Ch’ing had not wholly given up the power, and there 
was a struggle within the Kuomintang concerning the lead- 
ership. It was said in Hunan that further war was inevitable. 
Several armies were organized ajrainst the Manchus and 

C* O 

against Yuan Shih-k’ai.^ Among these was the Hunan army: 
But just as the Hunanese were preparing to move into ac- 
tion, Sun Yat-sen and Yuan Shih-k’ai came to an agreement, 
the scheduled Y^ar was called off, North and South were 
‘unified,’ and the Nanking Government was dissolved. 
Thinking the revolution was over, I resigned from the 
army and decided to return to my books. I had been a 
soldier for half a year. 

“I began to read advertisements in the papers. Many 
schools were then being opened and used this medium to 
attract new students. I had no special standard for judging 
schools; I did not know exactly what I wanted to do. An 
advertisement for a police school caught my eye and I 
registered for entrance to it. Before I was examined, how- 
ever, I read an advertisement of a soap-making ‘school.’ 
No tuition was required, board was furnished and a small 
salary v^as promised. It was an attractive and inspiring ad- 
vertisement. It told of the great social benefits of soap- 
making, how it would enrich the country and enrich the 
people. I changed my mind about the police school and 
decided to become a soap-maker. I paid my dollar registra- 
tion fee here also. 

“Meanwhile, a friend of mine had become a law student 
and he urged me to enter his school. I also read an alluring 

^ Yuan later became “President” of China, and in 1915 attempted 
to become Emperor. 



140 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

advertisement of this law school, which promised many 
wonderful things. It promised to teach students all about 
law in three years and guaranteed that at the end of this 
period they would instantly become mandarins. My friend 
kept praising the school to me, until finally I wrote to my 
family, repeated all the promises of the advertisement, and 
asked them to send me tuition money. I painted a bright 
picture for them of my future as a jurist and mandarin. 
Then I paid a dollar to register in the law school and waited 
to hear from my parents. 

“Fate again intervened in the form of an advertisement 
for a commercial school. Another friend counselled me 
that the country was in economic war, and that what was 
most needed were economists who could build up the na- 
tion’s economy. His argument prevailed and I spent an- 
other dollar to register in this commercial middle school. 
I actually enrolled there and was accepted. Meanwhile, 
however, I continued to read advertisements, and one day 
I read one describing the charms of a higher commercial 
public school. It was operated by the Government, it of- 
fered a wide curriculum, and I heard that its instructors 
were very able men. I decided it would be better to become 
a commercial expert there, paid my dollar and registered, 
then wrote to my father of my decision. He was pleased. 
My father readily appreciated the advantages of commer- 
cial cleverness. I entered this school and remained — for one 
month. 

“The trouble with my new school, I discovered, was 
that most of the courses were taught in English, and, in 
common with other students, I knew little English; indeed, 
scarcely more than the alphabet. An additional handicap 
was that the school provided no English teacher. Disgusted 
with this situation, I withdrew from the institution at the 
end of the month and continued my perusal of the adver- 
tisements. 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA I4I 

“My scholastic adventure was in the First Provincial 
Middle School. I registered for a dollar, took the entrance 
examination, and passed at the head of the list of candidates. 
It was a big school, with many students, and its graduates 
were numerous. A Chinese teacher there helped me very 
much; he was attracted to me because of my literary tend- 
ency. This teacher loaned me a book called the Chronicles 
'with Imperial Connnentaries (Yii P'i T'mig Chien'), which 
contained imperial edicts and critiques by Ch’ien Lung. 

“About this time a Government magazine exploded in 
Changsha. There was a huge fire, and we students found it 
very interesting. Tons of bullets and shells exploded, and 
gunpowder made an intense blaze. It was better than fire- 
crackers. About a month later T’an 'Yen-k’ai was driven 
out by Yuan Shih-k’ai, who now had control of the politi- 
cal machinery of the Republic. T’ang Hsiang-ming re- 
placed T'an Yen-k’ai and he set about making arrangements 
for Yuan’s enthronement. 

“I did not like the First Middle School. Its curriculum 
\vas limited and its regulations were objectionable. After 
reading Chronicles 'with Imperial Commentaries, I had also 
come to the conclusion that it would be better for me to 
read and study -alone. After six months I left the school, and 
arranged a schedule of education of my own, which con- 
sisted of reading every day in the Hunan Provincial Li- 
brary. I was very regular and conscientious about it, and 
the half-year I spent in this way I consider to have been ex- 
tremely valuable to me. I went to tlie library in the morning 
when it opened. At noon I paused only long enough to buy 
and consume nvo rice cakes, which were my daily lunch. 
I stayed in the library every day reading until it closed. 

“During this period of self-education I read many 
books, studied vmrld geography and n^orld history. There 
for the first time I saw and studied with great interest a 
map of the world. I read Adam Smith’s The Wealth of 



142 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

Nations, and Darwin’s Origin of Species, and a book on 
ethics by John Stuart Mill. I read the works of Rousseau, 
Spencer’s Logic, and a book on law M'ritten by Montes- 
quieu. I mixed poetry and romances, and the tales of ancient 
Greece, with serious study of history and geography of 
Russia, America, England, France and other countries. 

“I was then living in a guild house for natives of Hsiang 
Hsiang district. Many soldiers were there also — ‘retired’ or 
disbanded men from the district, who had no work to do 
and little money. Students and soldiers were always quar- 
relling in the guild house, and one night this hostility be- 
tween them broke out in physical violence. The soldiers 
attacked and tried to kill the students. I escaped by fleeing 
to the toilet, where I hid until the fight was over. 

“I had no money then, my family refusing to support 
me unless I entered school, and since I could no longer 
live in the guild house I began looking for a new place to 
lodge. Meanvdiile, I had been thinking seriously of my 
‘career’ and had about decided that I v^as best suited for 
teaching. I had begun reading advertisements again. An 
attractive announcement of the Hunan Normal School now 
came to my attention, and I read with interest of its ad- 
vantages: no tuition required, and cheap board and cheap 
lodging. Tvm of m}'- friends were also urging me to enter. 
They y^anted my help in preparing entrance essays. I wrote 
of my intention to my family and received their consent. 
I composed essays for my two friends, and yu'ote one of 
my own. All were accepted — ^in reality, therefore, I was 
accepted three times. I did not then think my act of sub- 
stituting for my friends an immoral one; it was merely a 
matter of friendship. 

“I was a student in the Normal School for five years, and 
managed to resist the appeals of all future advertising. Fi- 
nally I actually got my degree. Incidents in my life here, in 
the Hunan Provincial First Normal School, were many, 



DAYS IX CIIAXGSHA I43 

and during this period my political ideas began to take 
shape. Here also I acquired my first experiences in social 
action. 

“Tliere were many regulations in the new school and 
I agreed with X’ery few of them. For one thing, I was op- 
posed to the required courses in natural science. I wanted, 
to specialize in social sciences. Natural sciences did not 
especially interest me, and I did not study them, so I got 
poor marks in most of these courses. Most of all I hated a 
compulsory course in still-life draudng. I thought it ex- 
tremely stupid. I used to think of the simplest subjects pos- 
sible to draw, finish up quickly and leave the class. I re- 
member once drawing a picture of the ‘half-sun, half- 
rock,’^ which I represented by a straight line with a semi- 
circle over it. Another time during an examination in draw- 
ing I contented myself with making an oval. I called it an 
egg. I got 40 in drawing, and failed. Fortunately my marks 
in social sciences were all excellent, and they balanced my 
poor grades in these other classes. 

“A, Chinese teacher here, whom the students nick- 
named ‘Yuan the Big Beard,’ ridiculed my writing and 
called it the work of a journalist. He despised Liang Ch’i- 
ch’ao, who had been my model, and considered him half- 
literate. I \vas obliged to alter mv style. I studied the writ- 
ings of Han Yii, and mastered the old Classical phraseology. 
Thanks to Yuan the Big Beard, therefore, I can today still 
turn out a passable Classical essay if required. 

“The teacher ^Yho made the strongest impression on me 
was Yang Chen-ch’i, a returned student from England, 
with Ayhose life I was later to become intimately related. 
He taught ethics, he was an idealist, and a man of high 
moral character. He belieyed in his ethics ver)^ strongly and 
tried to imbue his students with the desire to become just, 
moral, yirtuous men, useful in society. Under his influence, 

^ The reference is to a line in a famous poem by Li T’ai-po. 



GENESIS' OF A COMMUNIST 


144 

I read a book on ethics translated by Ts’ai Yuan-p’ei and 
was inspired to write an essay which I entitled ‘The Energy 
of the Mind.’ I was then an idealist and my essay was 
highly praised by Professor Yang Chen-ch’i, from his ideal- 
ist viewpoint. He gave me a mark of 100 for it. 

“A teacher named T’ang used to give me old copies of 
the People’s Paper (Adin Pao), and I read them with keen 
interest. I learned from them about the activities and pro-, 
gramme of the T’ung Meng Hui.^ One day I read a copy 
of the Adm Pao containing a story about two Chinese stu- 
dents who were travelling across China and had reached 
Tatsienlu, on the edge of Tibet. This inspired me very 
much. I wanted to follow their example; but I had no 
money, and thought I should first try out travelling in 
Hunan. 

“The next summer I set out across the province by foot, 
and journeyed through five counties. I was accompanied 
by a student named Hsiao Yii. We walked through these 
five counties without using a single copper. The peasants 
fed us and gave us a place to sleep; wherever we went we 
were kindly treated and welcomed. This fellow, Hsiao Yii, 
with whom I travelled, later became a Kuomintang official 
in Nanking, under Yi Pei-chi, who was then president of 
Hunan Normal College. Yi Pei-chi became a high official 
at Nanking and got Hsiao Yii appointed to the office of 
custodian of the Pelting Palace Aduseum. Hsiao sold some 
of the most valuable treasures in the museum and ab- 
sconded with the funds in 1934. 

“Feeling expansive and the need for a few intimate com- 
panions, I one day inserted an advertisement in a Changsha 

^ The T’ung Aleng Hui, a revolutionarv secret society, was 
founded by Dr. Sun Yat-sen, and was forerunner of the Kuomintang, ■ 
which now has power in Nanking. Most of its members were exiles 
in Japan, where they carried on a vigorous “brush-war” against Liang 
Ch’i-ch’ao and K’ang Yu-wei, leaders of the “reformed monarchist” 
party. 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA 


145 

paper, inviting young men interested in patriotic work to 
make a contact with me. I specified youths who were 
hardened and determined, and ready to make sacrifices for 
their country. To this advertisement I received three and 
one-half replies. One was from Liu Chiang-lung, who later 
was to join the Communist Parry and afterwards to betray 
it. Two others were from young men who later were to 
become ultra-reactionaries. The ‘half reply came from a 
noncommittal youth named Li Li-san.^ Li listened to all 
I had to say, and then went away without making any defi- 
nite proposals himself, and our friendship never developed. 

“But gradually I did build up a group of students 
around myself, and the nucleus was formed of what later 
was to become a society' that was to have a widespread 
influence on the affairs and destiny of China. It was a seri- 
ous-minded little group of men and they had no time to 
discuss trivialities. Everything they did or said must have 
a purpose. They had no time for love or ‘romance’ and con- 
sidered the times too critical and the need for knowledge 
too urgent to discuss women or personal matters. I was not 
interested in women. My parents had married me when I 
was fourteen to a girl of twenty, but I had never lived with 
her — and never subsequently did. I did not consider her 
my wife and at this time gave little thought to her. Quite 
aside'from the discussions of feminine charm, which usu- 
ally play an important role in the lives of young men of 
this age, my companions even rejected talk of ordinary 
matters of daily life. I remember once being in the house 
of a youth who began to talk to me about buying some 
meat, and in mv presence called in his sen^ant and discussed 
the matter with him, then ordering him to buy a piece. I 


^ Li Li-san later became responsible for the famous “Li Li-san line." 
which Mao Tse-tung bitterly opposed. Farther on Mao tells of Li’s 
struggle with tlie Red Army, and of its results. 

" The Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui. 



■ 146 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

was annoyed and did not see this fellow again. My friends 
and I preferred to talk only of large matters — the nature of 
men, of human societ)'', of China, the world, and the uni- 
verse! 

“We also became ardent physical culturists. In the win- 
ter holidays we tramped through the fields, up and down 
mountains, along city walls, and across the streams and- 
rivers. If it rained we took off our shirts and called it a rain 
bath. When the sun was hot we also doffed shirts and called 
it a sun bath. In the spring winds we shouted that this was a 
new sport called ‘wind bathing.’ We slept in the open ydien 
frost was already falling and even in November swam in 
the cold rivers. All this went on under the title of ‘body- 
training.’ Perhaps it helped much to build the physique 
which I was to need so badly later on in my many marches 
back and forth across South China, and on the Long March 
from Kjangsi to the North-west. 

“I built up a wide correspondence with many students 
and friends in other towns and cities. Gradually I began to 
realize the necessity for a more closely knit organization. In 
1917, with some other friends, I helped to found the Hsin 
Min Hsiieh Hui (‘New People’s Study Society’). It had 
from seventy to eighty members, and of these many were 
later to become famous names in Chinese Communism, and 
in the history of the Chinese Revolution. Among the better- 
known Communists who were in the Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui 
were: Lo Man, now secretary of the Party Organization 
Committee; Hsia Hsi, now in the Second Front Red Army; 
Ho Hsien-hon, who became high judge of the Supreme 
Court in the Central Soviet regions and was later killed by 
Chiang Kai-shek; Kuo Liang, a famous labour-organizer, 
killed by General Ho Chien in 1930; Hsiao Chu-c'hang, a 
writer now in Soviet Russia; Ts’ai Ho-sheng, a member of 
the Central Committee of the Communist Party, killed by 
Chiang Kai-shek in 1927; Yeh Li-yiin, who became a mem- 



DAYS IN CHANGSHA 


H7 

ber of the Central Committee, and later ‘betrayed’ to the 
Kuomintang, and became a capitalist trade-union organizer; 
and Hsiao Chen, a prominent Party leader, one of the six 
signers of the original agreement for the formation of the 
Party, but who died not long ago from illness. The majorin’^ 
of the members of the Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui Y^ere killed in 
the counter-revolution of 1927. 

“Another society that was formed about that time, and 
resembled the Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui, was the ‘Social Wel- 
fare Society’ of Hupeh. Many of its members also later be- 
came Communists. Among them was Wen Teh-ying, its 
leader, who was killed during the counter-revolution by 
Chiang Kai-shek. Lin Piao, now president of the Red Army 
Academy, was a member. So was Chang Hao, now in 
charge of work among White troops. In Peiping there was 
a society called Fu Hsieh, some of whose members later 
became Reds. Elsewhere in China, notably in Shanghai, 
Hangchow, Hankow and Tientsin,^ radical societies were 
organized by the militant youth then beginning to assert an 
influence on Chinese politics. 

“Most of these societies were organized more or less un- 
der the influence of New Youth {Hsin Ch'ing Nieti), the 
famous magazine of the Literary Renaissance, edited by 
Ch’cn Tti-hsiu. I besjan to read this magazine while I was 
a student in the normal college and admired the articles of 
Hu Shill and Ch’en Tu-hsiu ver)'- much. They became for a 
while my models, replacing Liang Ch’i-ch’ao and Kang 
Yu-wei, whom I had already discarded. 

“At this time my mind was a curious mixture of ideas of 
liberalism, democratic reformism, and Utopian Socialism. 

^ In Tientsin it was the Chou-AVu Hsiieh Hui, or “Awakening So- 
ciet>%” which led in organization of radical youth. Chou En-lai was 
one of the founders. Others included: i\liss Teng Ying-ch’ao (now 
Airs. Chou En-lai); Ala Chun, who was cx'ccuted in Peking in 1927; 
and Sun Hsiao-ch’ing, now secretary' of the Canton Committee of the 
Kuomintang. 



148 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

I had somewhat vague passions about ‘nineteenth-century 
democracy,’ Utopianism and old-fashioned liberalism, and 
I was definitely anti-militarist and anti-imperialist. 

“I had entered the normal college in 1912. I was grad- 
uated in 1918.” 



5 

Prelude to Revolution 


< > 

D uring Mao’s recollections of his past I noticed that 
an auditor at least as interested as myself was Ho Tze- 
nien — his wife. Many of the facts he told about himself and 
the Communist movement she had evidently never lieard 
before, and this was true of most of Mao’s comrades in Pao 
An. Later on, when I gathered biographical notes from 
other Red leaders, their colleagues often crowded around 
interestedly to listen to the stories for the first time. Al- 
though they had all fought together for years, very often 
they knew nothing of each other’s pre-Communist days, 
which they had tended to regard as a kind of Dark Ages 
period, one’s real life beginning only when one became a 
Communist. 

It was another night, and Mao sat cross-legged, leaning 
against two dispatch-boxes. He lit a cigarette, and took up 
the thread of the story where he had left off the day be- 
fore: 

“During my years in normal school in Changsha I had 
spent, altogether, only $160 — ^including my numerous rcgis- 



PRELUDE TO REVOLUTION 149 

tration fees! Of this amount I must have used a third for 
newspapers, because regular subscriptions cost me about a 
dollar a month, and I often bought books and journals on 
the news-stands. My father cursed me for this extravagance. 
He called it wasted money on wasted paper. But I had ac- 
quired the newspaper-reading habit,’ and from 1911 to 
1927, when I climbed up Chingkanshan, I never stopped 
reading the daily papers of Peiping, Shanghai and Hunan. 

“In my last year in school my mother died, and more 
than ever I lost interest in returning home. I decided, that 
summer, to go to Peiping — ^then Peking. Many students 
from Hunan were planning trips to France, to study under 
the Svork and learn’ scheme, which France used to reciuit 
young Chinese in her cause during the World War. Before 
•leaving Cliina these students planned to study French in 
Peiping. I helped organize the movement, and in the groups 
who went abroad were many students from the Hunan 
Normal School, most of whom were later to become fa- 
mous radicals. Hsu Teh-lih was influenced by the move- 
ment also, and when he mms over fortv he left his professor- 
ship at Hunan Normal College and went to France. He did 
not become a Communist, however, till 1927. 

“I accompanied some of the Hunanese students to Pe- 
king. However, although I had helped organize the move- 
ment, and it had the support of the Hsin Min Hsiieh Flui, 1 
did not Avant to go to Europe. I felt that I did not know 
enough about mv OAvn country, and that my time could be 
more profitably spent in China. Those students who had 
decided to go to France studied French then from Li Shih- 
ts’un, who is now president of the Chung-fa (Sino-French) 
University, but I did not. I had other plans. 

“Peiping seemed verv expensive to me. I had reached 

’ Alodcrn newspapers were then still a novclw in China, and manv 
people, particularly officials, looked upon them with extreme repug- 
nance, as indeed they do today! 



150 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

the capital by borrowing from friends, and M'-hen I arrived 
I had to look for work at once. Yang Chen-ch’i, my former 
ethics teacher at the normal school, had become a professor 
at Peking National University. I appealed to him for help 
in finding a job, and he introduced me to the university 
librarian. This was Li Ta-chao, who later became a founder 
of the Communist Party of China, and was afterwards exe- 
cuted by Chang Tso-lin. Li Ta-chao gave me work, as 
assistant librarian, for which I was paid the generous sum 
of S8 a month. 

“My office tvas so low that people avoided me. One of 
my tasks was to register the names of people who came to 
read newspapers, but to most of them I didn’t exist as a 
human being. Among those who came to read I recognized 
the names of famous leaders of the renaissance movement, 
men like Fu Ssu-nien, Lo Chai-lung, and others, in whom I 
was intensely interested. I tried to begin conversations with 
them on political and cultural subjects, but they were very 
busy men. They had no time to listen to an assistant li- 
brarian speaking southern dialect. 

“But I wasn’t discouraged. I joined the Society of Phi- 
losophy, and the Journalism Society, in order to be able to 
attend classes in the university. In the Journalism Society I 
met fellovz-students like Chen Kung-po, who is now a high- 
official at Nanking; T’an P’ing-shan, who later became a 
Communist and still later a member of the so-called ‘Third 
Party’; and Shao P’iao-p’ing. Shao, especiall)^ helped me 
very much. He w^as a lecturer in the Journalism Society, a 
liberal, and a man of fervent idealism and fine character. 
Fie was killed by Chang Tso-lin in 1926. 

“While I was working in the library I also met Chang 
Kuo-t’ao, now vice-chairman of the Soviet Government; 
K’ang P’ei-ch’en, who later joined the Ku Klux Klan in 
California [!!! — ^E. S.]; and Tuan FIsi-p’ en, now Vice- 
Minister of Education in Nanking. And here also I met and 



PRELUDE TO REVOLUTION’ 151 

fell in love with Yang K’ai-hui. She was the daughter of my 
former ethics teacher, Yang Chen-ch’i, who had made a 
great impression on me in my youth, and who afterwards 
was a genuine friend in Peking. 

“My interest in politics continued to increase, and mv 
mind turned more and more radical. I have told vou of the 
background for this. But just now I was still confused, 
looking for a road, as wc say. I read some pamphlets on 
anarchy, and was much influenced by them. With a student 
named Chu Hsun-pci, who used to visit me, I often dis- 
cussed anarchism and its possibilities in China. At that time 
I favored many of its proposals. 

“My own living conditions in Peking were quite miser- 
able, and in contrast the beauty of the old capital \vas a 
vivid and living compensation. I stayed in a place called 
‘Three-Eyes Well’ (San Yen-ching), in a little room which 
held seven other people. When wc were ail packed fast 
on the k’avg there was scarcely room enough for any of 
us to breathe. I used to have to warn people on each side 
of me when I wanted to turn over. But in the parks and 
the old palace grounds I saw the early northern spring, I 
saw the white plum blossoms flower while the ice still held 
solid over the North Sea. I saw the willows over Pei Hai 
with the ice crystals hanging from them and remembered 
the description of the scene by the T'ang poet Chen Chang, 
who wrote about Pci Hai’s winter-jewelled trees, Inofn'ng 
‘like ten thousand peach-trees blossoming.’ The innumer- 
able trees of Peking aroused my wonder and admiration. 

“Early in 1919 I went to Shanghai, with the students 
bound for France. I had a ticket onh’ to Tientsin, and I did 
not know how I was to get any farther. But, as the Chinese 
proverb says, ‘Heaven will not delay a traveller,’ and a 
fortunate loan of $10 from a fellow student, who had got 
some money from the Compte School in Pcipins, enabled 
me to buy a ticket as far as P'u-k'ou. En route to Nanking 



152 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

I Stopped at Ch’u Fou and visited Confucius’ grave. I saw 
the small stream where Confucius’ disciples bathed their 
feet and the little town where the sage liv^ed as a child. He 
is supposed to have planted a famous tree near the historic 
temple dedicated to him, and I saw that. I also stopped by 
the river where Yen Hui, one of Confucihs’ famous disciples, 
had once lived, and I saw the birthplace of Mencius. On 
this trip I climbed T’ai Shan, the sacred mountain of Shan- 
tung, where General Feng Yii-hsiang retired and wrote his 
patriotic scrolls. 

“But when I reached P’u-k’ou I was again without a 
copper, and without a ticket. Nobody had any money to 
lend me; I did not know how I was to get out of town. But 
the worst of the tragedy happened when a thief stole my 
only pair of shoes! Ai-ya! What was I to do? But again, 
‘Heaven null not delay a traveller,’ and I had a very good 
piece of luck. Outside the railway station I met an old friend 
from Hunan, and he proved to be my ‘good angel.’ He lent 
me money for a pair of shoes, and enough to buy a ticket 
to Shanghai. Thus I safely completed my journey — keeping 
an eye on my new shoes. At Shanghai I found that a good 
sum had been raised to help send the students to France, and 
an allowance had been provided to help me return to Hunan. 
I saw my friends off on the steamer and then set off for 
Changsha. 

“Fligh marks of my first trip to the North, as I remember 
it, were these excui'sions: 

“I walked on the ice of the Gulf of Pei Hai. I walked 
round the lake of T’fing T’ing, and I circled the wall of 
Paotingfu. I walked round the wall of Hsuchou, famous in 
the Three Kingdovts {San Kno), and round Nanking’s wall, 
also famous in history. Finally, I climbed T’ai Shan and 
visited Confucius’ grave. These seemed to me then achieve- 
ments worth adding to my adventures and walking tours 
in Hunan. 



PRELUDE TO REVOLUTION 1 53 

“When I returned to Changsha I took a more direct 
role in politics. After the May Fourth Movement I had de- 
voted most of my time to student political activities, and I 
was editor of the Hsmig Chmig Review, the Hunan students’ 
paper, which had a great influence on the student movement 
in South China. In Changsha I helped found the Wen-hua 
Shu Hui (Cultural Book Society), an association for study 
of modem cultural and political tendencies. This society, 
and more especially the Hsin A-Iin Hsiieh Hui, were vio- 
lently opposed to Chang Ching-yao, then tuchun of Hunan, 
and a vicious character. We led a general student strike 
against Chang, demanding his removal, and sent delegations 
to Peiping and the South-west, where Sun Yat-sen was then 
active, to agitate against him. In retaliation to the students’ 
opposition, Chang Ching-yao suppressed the Hsiang Cbiang 
Review. 

“After this I went to Peking, to represent the Hsin. Min 
Hsiieh Hui, and organize an anti-militarist movement there. 
The Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui broadened its fight against Chang 
Ching-yao into a general anti-militarist agitation, and I 
became head of a news agency, to promote this work. In 
Hunan the movement was rewarded with some success. 
Chang Ching-yao was overthrown by T’an Yen-k’ai, and a 
new regime was established in Changsha. About this time 
the Hsin Alin Hsiieh Hui began to divide into two groups, 
a Right and Left wing — the Left wing insisting on a pro- 
gramme of far-reaching social and economic and political 
changes. 

“I went to Shanghai for the second time in 1919. There 
once more I saw Ch’en Tu-hsiu.^ I had first met him in 

^ Ch’en Tu-hsiu was born in Anhui, in 1879, became a lioted 
scholar and essayist and for years headed the department of literature 
at Peking National University — “cradle of the Literary Renaissance” 
— of which Ch’en was the leader. His Hsin CHmg-Nien (New Youth) 
magazine began the movement for adoption of the pai-hua or ver- 
nacular Chinese as the national language to replace the “dead” wen- 



154 GENESIS OF A COiVIMUNIST 

Peking, when I v/as at Peking National University, and he 
had influenced me perhaps more than any one else. I also 
met Hu Shih at that time, having called on him to try to win 
his support for the Hunanesc students’ struggle. In Shanghai 
I discussed with Ch’cn Tu-hsiu our plans for a League for 
Reconstruction of Hunan. Then I returned to Changsha, 
and began to organize it, I took a place as a teacher there, 
meanwhile continuing my activity in the Hsin Min Hsiieh 
Hui. The society had a programme then for the ‘independ- 
ence’ of Hunan, meaning, really, autonomy. Disgusted with 
the Northern Government, and believing that Hunan could 
modernize more rapidly if freed from connections with 
Peking, our group agitated for separation. I was then a 
strong supporter of America’s Monroe Doctrine and the 
Open Door. 

“T’an Yen-k’ai was driven out of Hunan by a militarist 
called Chao Heng-t’i, who utilized the ‘Hunan independence’ 
movement for his own ends. He pretended to support it, 
advocating the idea of a United Autonomous States of 
China, but as soon as he got power he suppressed the 
democratic movement with great energy. Our group had 
demanded equal rights for men and women, and represent- 
ative government, and in general approval of a platform for 
a bourgeois democracy. We openly advocated these re- 
forms in our paper, the Neto Himan. We led an attack on 
the provincial parliament, the majority of whose members 
were landlords and gentry appointed by the militarists. 
This struggle ended in our pulling down the scrolls and 
banners, which were full of nonsensical and extravagant 
phrases. 

yen or Classical language. He was founder and chief promoter of the 
Communist Party in China, later became a member of the Central 
Executive Committee of the Kuomintang. He was arrested in Shang- 
hai in 1933 by the Kuomintang authorities, given a farcical “trial,” and 
served a long sentence at Nanking. With Lu Hsun he ranks as, a most 
important literary figure of his time. 



PRELUDE TO REVOLUTION . 1 55 

“The attack on the parliament was considered a big inci- 
dent in Hnnan, and frightened the rulers. However, when 
Chao Heng-t’i seized control he betrayed all the ideas he 
had supported, and especially he violently suppressed all 
demands for democracy. Our society therefore turned the 
struggle against him. I remember an episode in 1920, when 
the Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui organized a demonstration to 
celebrate the third anniversary of the Russian October 
Revolution. It was suppressed by the police. Some of the 
demonstrators had attempted to raise the Red Flag at that 
meeting, but were prohibited from doing so by the police, 
They then pointed out that, according to Article 12 of the 
(then) Constitution, the people had the right to assemble, 
organize, and speak, but the police were not impressed. 
They replied that they were not there to be taught the 
Constitution, but to carry out the orders of the governor, 
Chao Heng-t’i. From this time on I became more and more 
convinced that only mass political power, secured through 
mass action, could guarantee the realization of dynamic 
reforms. 

“In the winter of 1920, I organized workers politically, 
for the first time, and began to be guided in this by the in- 
fluence of Marxist theory and the history of the Russian 
Revolution’. During my second visit to Peking I had read 
much about the events in Russia, and had eagerly sought 
out what little Communist literature was then available in 
Chinese. Three books especially deeply carved my mind, 
■ and built up in me a faith in Marxism, from which, once I 
had accepted it as the correct interpretation of histor)'’, I 
did not afterwards waver. These books were The Com- 
mimist Manifesto, translated by Chen Wang-tao, and the 
first Marxist book ever published in Chinese; Class Struggle, 
b}*^ Kautsky; and a History of Socialism, by Kirkupp. By 
the summer of 1920 I had become, in theory and to some 
extent in action, a Marxist, and from this time on I con- 



156 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

sidered myself a Marxist. In the same year I married Yang 
K’ai-hui.”i 

4 > 


4 

The Nationalist Period 



M ao was now a Marxist, but not a Communist — simply 
because as yet there did not exist in China such an 
organization as the Communist Party. Ch’en Tu-hsiu had 
established contact with the Comintern as early as 1919. 
In 1920, M. Marlin, an energetic and persuasive representa- 
tive of the Third International — the Ti San Kuo Chi, as the 
Chinese call it — came to Shanghai and arranged for connec- 
tions to be made with a Chinese Party. Shortly afterwards 
Ch’en summoned a conference in Shanghai, while almost 
simultaneously a group of Chinese students conferred in 
Paris and proposed to form a Communist organization there. 

When one remembers that the Chinese Communist Party 
is still an adolescent of sixteen years, its achievements may 
be regarded as not inconsiderable. It is the strongest Com- 
munist Party in the world, outside of Russia, and the only 
one, with the same exception, that can boast a mighty army 
of its own. 

Another night, and Mao carried on his narrative: 

^ Mao made no further reference to his life with Yang K’ai-hui. 
She was a student of Peking National University and later became a 
leader of youth during the Great Revolution, and one of the most 
active women Communists. Their marriage was celebrated as an 
“ideal romance” among radical youths in Hunan. It seems to have 
begun as a trial marriage; and they were evidently very devoted to 
one another. She was killed by Ho Chien — in 1930, I believe. 



THE NATIONALIST PERIOD ■ 157 

“In May of 1921 , 1 went to Shanghai to attend the foun- 
dation meeting of the Communist Party. In its organization 
the leading roles were played by Ch’en Tu-hsiu and Li Ta- 
chao, both of whom were among the most brilliant intel- 
lectual leaders of China. Under Li Ta-chao, as assistant 
librarian at Peking National University, I had rapidly de- 
veloped towards Marxism, and Ch’en Tu-hsiu had been 
instrumental in my interests in that direction too. I had 
discussed with Ch’en, on my second visit to Shanghai, the 
Marxist books that I had read, and Ch’en’s own assertions 
of belief had deeply impressed me at what was probably a 
critical period in my life. 

“There was only one other Hunanese at the historic 
first meeting in Shanghai. Others present were Chang Kuo- 
t’aa Pao Hui-sheng and Chou Hu-hai. Altogether there 
were twelve of us. The following October the first provin- 
cial branch of the Communist Party was organized in Hu- 
nan, and I became a member of it. Organizations were also 
established then in other provinces and cities. In Shanghai 
the Central Party Committee included Ch’en Tu-hsiu, 
Chang Kuo-t’ao (now with the Fourth Front Red Army), 
Chen Kung-po (now a Kuomintang official), Shih Tseng- 
tung- (now a Nanking official). Sun Yuan-lu, Li Han-tsen 
(killed in Wuhan in 1927), Li Ta (later executed), and Li 
Sun. Members in Hupeh included Teng Pi-wu (now chair- 
man of the Communist Party School in Pao An), Hsu Pei- 
hao, and Ssu Yang. In the Shansi party were Kao Chung-yu 
and some famous student leaders. In Peiping were Li Ta- 
chao (later executed), Teng Sung-hsia, Chang Kuo-t’ao 
(now vice-chairman of the Red military council), Lo 
Chang-lun, Lu Jen-ching (now a Trotskyite), and others. 
In Canton were Lin Pai-ch’u (now Commissioner of Finance 
in the Soviet Government) and P’eng Pai (executed in 
1927). Wang Chin-mei and Teng Er-ming were among the 
founders of the Shantung branch. 



158 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

“Meanwhile, in France, a Chinese Communist Party had 
been organized by many of the worker-students there, and 
its founding was almost simultaneous with the beginning of 
the organization in China. Among the founders of the Party 
there were Chou En-lai, Li Li-san, and Shang Chen-yu, the 
wife of Tsai Ho-sheng, and the only Chinese woman among 
the founders. Lo Man and Tsai Ho-sheng were also found- 
ers of the French branch. A Chinese Party was organized 
in Germany, but this was somewhat later: among its mem- 
bers were Kao Yu-han, Chu Teh (now Commander-in- 
Chief of the Red Army), and Chang Sheng-fu (now a 
professor at Tsinghua University). In Moscow the founders 
of the branch were Ch’ii Ch’iu-pai and others, and in Japan 
there was Chou Fu-hai. 

“In May, 1922, the Hunan Party, of which I was then 
secretary, had already organized more than twenty trade- 
unions, among miners, railway workers, municipal em- 
ployees, printers, and workers in the Government Mint. 
A vigorous labour movement began that winter. The work 
of the Communist Party was then concentrated mainly on 
students and workers, and very little was done among the 
peasants. Most of the big mines were organized and virtually 
all the students. There were numerous struggles on both the 
students’ and workers’ fronts. In the winter of 1922, Chao 
Heng-t’i, civil governor of Hunan, ordered the execution 
of two Hunanese workers, Huang Ai and Pang Yuan-ch’ing 
and as a result a widespread agitation began against him. 
Huang Ai, one of the two workers killed, was a leader of 
the Right-ndng labour movement, which had its base in 
the industrial-school students and v/as opposed to us, but 
v’e supported them in this case, and in many other strug- 
gles. Anarchists were also influential in the trade-unions, 
vTich were then organized into an All-Hunan Labour 
Syndicate. But we compromised and through negotia- 



THE NATIONALIST PERIOD 1 59 

tion prevented many hasty and useless actions by them. 

“I was sent to Shanghai to help organize the movement 
against Chao Heng-t’i. The Second Congress of the Party 
was convened in Shanghai that winter (1922), and I in- 
tended to attend. However, I forgot the name of the plate 
where it was to be held, could not find any comrades, and 
missed it. I returned to Hunan and vigorously pushed the 
work among the labour unions. That spring there were 
many strikes for better wages and better treatment and 
recognition of the labour unions. Most of these were suc- 
cessful. On May i, a general strike was called in Hunan, and 
this marked the achievement of unprecedented strength in 
the labour movement of China. 

“The Third Congress of the Comrhunist Party was held 
in Canton in 1923 and the historic decision was reached to 
enter the Kuomintang, co-operate with it, and create a 
United Front against the northern militarists. I went to 
Shanghai and worked in the Central Committee of the 
Party. Next spring (1924) I went to Canton and attended 
the First National Congress of the Kuomintang. In March, 
I returned to Shanghai and combined my work in the execu- 
tive bureau of the Communist Party with membership in 
the executive bureau of the Kuomintang of Shanghai. Tlie 
other members of this bureau then v^ere Wang Ching-wei 
(later Premier at Nanking), and Hu Han-min, with whom 
I worked in co-ordinating the measures of the Communist 
Party and the Kuomintang. That summer the Whampoa 
Military Academy was set up. Galen became its adviser, 
other Soviet advisers arrived from Russia, and the Kuomin-^ 
tang-Communist Party entente began to assume the propor- 
tions of a nation-wide revolutionary movement. The fol- 
lowing winter I returned to Hunan for a rest. I had become 
ill in Shanghai, but while in Hunan I organized the nucleus 
of the great peasant movement of that province. 



l6o . GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

“Formerly I had not fully realized the degree of class 
struggle among the peasantry, but after the May 30th In- 
cident (1925), and during the' great wave of political activ- 
ity which followed it, the Hunanese peasantry became very 
militant. I left my home, where I had been resting, and be- 
gan a rural organizational campaign. In a few months we 
had formed more than twenty peasant unions, and had 
aroused the wrath of the landlords, who demanded my ar- 
rest. Chao Heng-t’i sent troops after me, and I fled to Can- 
ton! I reached there just at the time the Whampoa students 
had defeated Yang PIsi-ming, the Yunnan militarist, and Lu 
Tsung-wai, the Kwangsi militarist, and an air of great op- 
timism pervaded the city and the Kuomintang. Chiang Kai- 
shek had been made commander of the First Army and 
Wang Ching-wei chairman of the Government, following 
the death of Sun Yat-sen in Peking. 

“I became editor of the Political Weekly, a publication 
of the political department of the Kuomintang. It later 
played a very active role in attacking and discrediting the 
Right wing of the Kuomintang, led by Tai Chi-t’ao. I was 
also put in charge of training organizers for the peasant 
movement, and established a course for this purpose which 
was attended by representatives from twenty-one different 
provinces, and included students from Inner Mongolia. Not 
long after my arrival in Canton I became chief of the Agit- 
prop department of the Kuomintang, and candidate for the 
Central Committee. Lin Pai-ch’u was then chief of the 
peasant department of the Kuomintang, and T’an P’ing- 
shan, another Communist, was chief of the workers’ de- 
partment. 

“I was writing more and more, and assuming special 
responsibilities in peasant work in the Communist Party. 
On the basis of my study and of my work in organizing 
the Hunan peasants, I wrote two pamphlets, one called An 
Analysis of the Different Classes of Chinese Society, and the 



THE NATIONALIST PERIOD l6l 

Other called The Class Basis of Chao Heng-fi, and the Tasks 
Before Us. Ch’en Tu-hsiu opposed the opinions expressed in 
the first one, which advocated a radical land policy and 
vigorous organization of the peasantry, under the Commu- 
nist Party, and he refused it publication in the Communist 
central organs. It was later published in the Feasant 
Monthly^ of Canton, and in the magazine Chmig Kuo 
Ch'ing-nien {Chinese Youth). The second thesis was pub- 
lished as a pamphlet in Hunan. I began to disagree with 
Ch’en’s Right opportunist policy about this time, and we 
gradually drew further apart, although the struggle between 
us did not come to a climax until 1927. 

“I continued to work in the Kuomintang in Canton until 
about the time Chiang Kai-shek attempted his first coup 
d'etat there in March, 1926. After the reconciliation of 
Left and Right wing Kuomintang and the reaffirmation of 
the Kuomintang-Communist solidarity, I went to Shanghai, 
in the spring of 1926, The Second Congress of the Kuomin- 
tang was held in May of that year, under the leadership of 
Chiang Kai-shek. In Shanghai I directed the peasant depart- 
ment of the Communist Party, and from there was sent to 
Hunan, as inspector of the peasant movement. Meanwhile, 
under the United Front of the Kuomintang and the Com- 
munist Party, the historic Northern Expedition began in 
the* autumn of 1926. 

“In Flunan I inspected peasant organization and political 
conditions in five hsien — Changsha, Li Ling, Hsiang T’an, 
Hung Shan and Hsiang Hsiang — and made my report to 
the Central Committee, urging the adoption of a new line 
in the peasant movement. E^rly next spring, when I reached 
Wuhan, an inter-provincial meeting of peasants was held, 
and I attended it and discussed the proposals of my thesis, 
which carried recommendations for a widespread redistribu- 
tion of land. At this meeting were P’eng Pai, Fang Chih-min 
and two Russian Communists, York and Volen, among 



1 62 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

Others, A resolution was passed adopting my proposal for 
submission to the Fifth Conference of the Communist 
Party. Tlie Central Committee, however, rejected it. 

“When the Fifth Conference was convened in Wuhan 
in May, 1927, the Party was still under the domination of 
Ch’en Tu-hsiu. Although Chiang Kai-shek had already led 
the counter-revolution and begun his attacks on the Com- 
munist Party in Shanghai and Nanking, Ch’en was still for 
moderation and concessions to the Wuhan Kuomintang, 
Overriding all opposition, he followed a Right opportunist 
petty-bourgeois policy. I was very dissatisfied with the 
Party policy then, especially towards the peasant move- 
ment. I think today that if the peasant movement had been 
more thoroughly organized and armed for a class struggle 
against the landlords, the Soviets would have had an earlier 
and far more powerful development throughout the whole 
country. 

“But Ch’en Tu-hsiu violently disagreed. He did not 
understand the role of the peasantry in the revolution and 
greatly underestimated its possibilities at this time. Conse- 
quently, the Fifth Conference, held on the eve of the crisis 
of the Great Revolution, failed to pass an adequate land 
programme. My opinions, which called for rapid intensifica- 
tion of the agrarian struggle, were not even discussed, for the 
Central Committee, also dominated by Ch’en Tu-hsiu, re- 
fused to bring them up for consideration. The Conference 
dismissed the land problem by defining a landlord as ‘a 
peasant who owned over 500 7 /i<yz{ of land’ — a wholly inade- 
quate and unpractical basis on which to deV^elop the class 
struggle, and quite without consideration of the special 
character of land economy in China. Following the Confer- 
ence, however, an All-China Peasants’ Union was organized 
and I became first president of it. 

“By the spring of 1927, the peasant movement in Hupeh, 
Kiangsi and Fukien, and especially in Hunan, had developed 



THE NATIONALIST PERIOD 1 63 

a Startling militancy, despite the lukewarm attitude of the 
Communist Party to it, and the definite alarm of the Kuo- 
mintang. High officials and army commanders began to 
demand its suppression, describing the Peasants’ Union as 
a ‘vagabond union,’ and its actions and demands as excessive. 
Ch’en Tu-hsiu had withdrawn me from Hunan, holding me 
responsible for certain happenings there, and violently op- 
posing my ideas. 

“In April, the counter-revolutionarj’- movement had 
begun in Nanking and Shanghai, and a general massacre of 
organized workers had taken place under Chiang Kai-shek. 
The same measures were carried out in Canton. On May 21, 
the Hsu Ko-hsiang Uprising occurred in Hunan. Scores of 
peasants and v'orkers were killed by the reactionaries. 
Shortl}'^ afterwards the ‘Left’ Kuomintang at 'Wuhan an- 
nulled its agreement with the Communists and ‘expelled’ 
them from the Kuomintang and from a government which 
quickly ceased to exist. 

“A'lanv Communist leaders were now' ordered bv the 

y «■ 

Party to leave the country, go to Russia or Shanghai or 
places of safety. I was ordered to go to Szechuan. I per- 
suaded Ch’en Tu-hsiu to send me to Hunan instead, as 
secretar)'- of the Provincial Committee, but after ten days 
he ordered me hastily to return, accusing me of organizing 
an uprising against T’ang Sheng-chih, then in command at 
'Wuhan. The affairs of the Party were now in a chaotic 
state. Nearl)'' ever^mne was opposed to Ch’en Tu-hsiu’s 
leadership and his opportunist line. The collapse of the 
entente at Wuhan soon afterwards brought about his down- 
fall.” 



•4 


5 

The Soviet Movement 



A CONVERSATION I had with Mao Tse-tung con- 
cerning the much disputed events of the spring of 
1927 seems to me of sufficient interest to mention here. It • 
was not part of his autobiography, as he told it to me; but 
it is important to note as a personal reflection on what was 
a turning-point experience in the life of every Chinese 
Communist. 

I asked Alao whom he considered most responsible for 
the failure of the Communist Party in 1927, the defeat of 
the Wuhan Coalition Government, and the whole triumph 
of the Nanking dictatorship. Mao placed the greatest blame 
on Ch’en Tu-hsiu, whose “wavering opportunism deprived 
the Party of decisive leadership and a direct line of its own 
at a moment when further compromise clearly meant ca- 
tastrophe.” 

After Ch’en, the man most responsible for the defeat was 
Borodin, chief Russian political adviser. Mao explained that 
Borodin had completely reversed his position, favouring a 
radical land redistribution in 1926, but strongly opposing it 
in 1927, without any logical support for his vacillations. 
“Borodin stood just a little to the right of Ch’en Tu-hsiu,” 
Mao said, “and was ready to do everything to please the 

164 



THE SOVIET MOVEMENT 1 65 

bourgeoisie, even to the disarming of the workers, which 
he finally ordered.” Roy, the Indian delegate to the Comin- 
tern, “stood a little to the left of both Ch’en and Borodin, 
but he only stood.” He “could talk,” according to Mao, 
“and he talked too much, without offering any method of 
realization.” Mao thought that, objectively, Roy had been 
a fool, Borodin a blunderer, and Ch’en an unconscious 
traitor. 

“Ch’en was really frightened of the vmrkers and espe- 
cially of the armed peasants. Confronted at last with the 
reality of armed insurrection he completely lost his senses. 
He could no longer see clearly what was happening, and his 
petty-bourgeois instincts betrayed him into panic and de- 
feat.” 

Ch’en was at that time complete dictator of the Chinese 
Party, and took vital decisions without even consulting the 
Central Committee. “He did not show other Party leaders 
the orders of the Comintern, nor even discuss them with 
us.” But in the end it was Roy who forced the break with 
the Kuomintang. The Comintern sent a message to Boro- 
din, ordering the Parry to begin confiscation of the land- 
lords’ land. Roy got hold of a copy of it, and promptly 
showed it to Wang Ching-wei, then chainnan of the Left- 
ist Wuhan Government. The result of this caprice^ is well 
known. The Communists were expelled from the Kuomin- 
tang by the Wuhan regime, its strength collapsed, and soon 
afterwards Chiang Kai-shek destroyed V’i'’'uhan itself. 

In 1927 the Comintern was sending its directives to 
Ch’en Tu-hsiu, who made his own interpretation of them, 
ignoring them sometimes when he disagreed, without con- 
sulting his comrades. The fiasco of Wuhan became, of 
course, a pivot of the struggle in Russia over the nature of 

^ An interesting account of this incident, and the whole period, 
from the Left Kuomintang point of view, is given in The Inner His- 
tory of the Chinese Revolution, by T’ang Leang-li (London, 1930). 



l66 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

the world revolution. It was following this period that the 
Opposition in Russia was crushed, Trotsky’s theory of “per- 
manent revolution” was discredited, and the Soviet Union 
set out in earnest to “build Socialism in one country” — 
from which point it has now arrived at the position of bul- 
wark of world peace. 

Mao does not think that the counter-revolution would 
have been defeated in 1927, however, even if the Communist 
Party had carried out a more aggressive policy, and created 
Communist armies fi'om the workers and peasants before 
the split with the Kuomintang. “But the Soviets could have 
got an immense start in the South, and a base in which, 
afterwards, they would never have been destroyed. . . 

In his narrative of himself Mao had now reached the be- 
ginning of the Soviets, which arose from the wreckage of 
the revolution and struggled with bare hands even yet to 
build a new victory out of defeat. He continued: 

“On August I, 1927, the 20th Army, under Ho Lung 
and Yeh T’ing, and in co-operation with Chu Teh, led the 
historic Nanchang Uprising, and the beginning of tvhat 
was to become the Red Army was organized. A week later, 
on August 7, an extraordinary meeting of the Central Com- 
mittee of the Party deposed Ch’en Tu-hsiu as secretary. I 
had been a member of the political bureau of the Party 
since the Tliird Conference at Canton in 1924, and was ac- 
tive in this decision, and among the ten other members 
present at the meeting were: Ts’ai Ho-sheng, P’eng 
Kung-t’a and Ch’ii Ch’iu-pai, A new line was adopted by 
the Party, and all hope of co-operation with the Kuomin- 
tang was given up for the present, as it had already become 
hopelessly the tool of imperialism and could not carry out 
the responsibilities of a democratic revolution. The long 
open struggle for power now began. 

“I was sent to Changsha to organize the movement 



1 68 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

however, I attempted to bribe the escort to free me. The 
ordinary soldiers were mercenaries, with no special interest 
in seeing me killed, and they agreed to release me, but the 
subaltern in charge refused to permit it. I therefore decided 
to attempt to escape, but had no opportunity to do so until 
I was within about two hundred yards of the min-t’iian 
headquarters. At that point I broke loose and ran into the 
fields. 

“I reached a high place, above a pond, with some tall 
grass surrounding it, and there I hid until sunset. The sol- 
diers pursued me, and forced some peasants to help them, 
search for me. Many times they came very near, once or 
twice so close that I could almost have touched them, but 
somehow I escaped discovery, although half a dozen times 
I gave up hope, feeling certain I would be recaptured. At 
last, when it was dusk, they abandoned the search. At once 
I set off across the mountains, travelling all night. I had no 
shoes and my feet were badly bruised. On the road I met a ' 
peasant who befriended me, gave me shelter and later 
guided me to the next district. I had seven dollars with me, 
and used this to buy some shoes, an umbrella and food. 
When at last I reached the peasant guards safely, I had only 
two coppers in my pocket. 

“With the establishment of the new division, I became 
chairman of its Party Front Committee, and Yii Sha-t’ou, 
a commander of the garrison troops at Wuhan, became 
commander of the First Army. Yii, however, had been more 
or less forced to take the position by the attitude of his 
men; soon afterwards he deserted and joined the Kuomin- 
tang. He is now working for Chiang Kai-shek at Nanking. 

“The little army, leading the peasant uprising, moved 
southward through Hunan. It had to break its way through 
thousands of Kuomintang troops and fought many battles, 
with many reverses. Discipline was poor, political training 
was at a low level, and many wavering elements were among 



THE SOVIET MOVEMENT 169 

the men and officers. There were many desertions. After 
Yii Sha-t’ou fled, the army was reorganized when it reached 
Ning K’ou. Cheng Hao was made commander of the re- 
maining troops, about one regiment; he, too, later on ‘be- 
trayed.’ But many in that first group remained loyal to the 
end, and are today still in the Red Army — men such as Lo 
Yun-hui, political commissar of the First Army Corps, and 
Yang Lo-sou, now an army commander. When the little 
band finally climbed up Chingkanshaffi they numbered in 
all only about one thousand. 

“Because the programme of the Autumn Crop Uprising 
had not been sanctioned by the Central Committee, because 
also the First Army had suffered some severe losses, and 
from the angle of the cities the movement appeared doomed 
to failure, the Central Committee now definitely repudiated 
me. I was dismissed from the Politburo, and also from the 
Party Front Committee. The Plunan Provincial Committee 
also attacked us, calling us ‘the rifle movement.’ We never- 
theless held our army together at Chingkanshan, feeling 
certain that we were followinar the correct line, and subse- 
quent events v'ere to vindicate us full^^ Nev' recruits were 
added and the division filled out again. I became its com- 
mander. 

“From the winter of 1927 to the autumn of 1928, the 
First Division held its base at Chingkanshan. In November, 
1927, the first Soviet was set up in Tsalin, on the Hunan 
border, and the first Soviet Government was elected. Its 
chairman was Tou Tsung-ping. In this Soviet, and subse- 
quently, v^e promoted a democratic programme, vdth a 
moderate policy, based on slow but regular development. 
This earned Chingkanshan the recriminations of putschists 

' Chingkanshan was a nearly impregnable mountain stronghold, 
formerly held by bandits, on the Hunan-Kiangsi border. An account 
of the Communists’ seizure of this mountain, and their subsequent 
experiences there, will be found in China’s Red Army Marches, by 
Agnes Smedley (New York, 1933). 



170 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

in the Party, who 'were demanding a terrorist policy of 
raiding, and burning and killing of landlords, in order to 
destroy their morale. The First Army Front Committee 
refused to adopt such tactics, and were therefore branded 
b)^ the hotheads as ‘reformists.’ I was bitterly attacked by 
them for not carrying out a more ‘radical’ policy. 

“Two former bandit leaders near Chingkanshan, named 
Wang Tso and Yuan Wen-tsai, joined the Red Army ih the 
winter of 1927. This increased the strength to about three 
regiments. V/ang and Yuan were each made regimental 
commanders and I was army commander. These two men, 
although former bandits, had thrown in their forces with 
the Nationalist Revolution, and were now ready to fight 
against the reaction. While I remained on Chingkanshan 
they were faithful Communists, and carried out the orders 
of the Party. Later on, when they were left alone at Ching- 
kanshan, they returned to their bandit habits. Subsequently 
they were killed by the peasants, by then organized and 

Sovietized and able to defend themselves. 

^ * 

“In May of 1928, Chu Teh arrived at Chingkanshan, 
and our forces were combined. Together we drew up a 
plan to establish a s\x-bsien Soviet area, to stabilize and con- 
solidate gradually the Communist power in the Hunan- 
Kiangsi-Kwangtung border districts, and, with that as a 
base, to expand over greater areas. This strategy was in 
opposition to recommendations of the Party, which had 
grandiose ideas of rapid expansion. In the army itself Chu 
Teh and I had to fight against two tendencies: first, a de- 
sire to advance on Changsha at once, which we considered 
adventurism; secondly, a desire to vfithdraw to the south 
of the Kwangtung border, which we regarded as ‘retreat- 
ism,’ Our main tasks, as we saw them then, were two: to 
divide the land, and to establish Soviets. We wanted to arm 
the masses to hasten those processes. Our policy called for 



THE SOVIET MOVEiMEXT 17J 

free trade, generous treatment of captured enemy troops, 
and, in general, democratic moderation. 

“A representative meeting was called at Chingkanshan 
in the autumn of 1928, and was attended by delegates from 
Soviet districts north of Chingkanshan. Some division of 
opinion still existed among Party men in the Soviet districts 
concerning the points mentioned above, and at this meeting 
differences were thoroughly aired. A minority argued that 
our future on this basis was narrowly limited, but the 
majority had faith in the policy, and, when a resolution was 
proposed, declaring that the Soviet movement would be 
victorious, it y'as easily passed. The Party Central Com- 
mittee, how'ever, had not yet given the movement its sanc- 
tion. This was not received till the winter of 1928, when 
the report of proceedings at the Sixth Congress of the 
Communist Party, held in iMoscow, reached Chingkanshan. 

“With the new line adopted at that Congress, Chu Teh 
and I were in complete agreement. From that time on, the 
differences between the leaders of the Party and the lead- 
ers of the Soviet movement in the agrarian districts disap- 
peared. Party harmony tvas re-established. 

“Resolutions at the Sixth Conference summarized the 
experience of the 1925-1927 revolution, the Nanchang, Can- 
ton and Autumn Crop Uprisings, and concluded with ap- 
proval of the emphasis on. the agrarian movement. About 
this time Red armies began to appear elsewhere in China. 
Uprisings had occurred in western and eastern Hupeh, in 
the winter of 1927, and these furnished the basis for new 
Soviet districts. Ho Lung in the west and Hsu Hai-Uing in 
the east began to form their own worker-peasant armies. 
The latter’s area of operations became the nucleus of the 
Oyiiwan Soviet, to which, later on, went Hsu Hsiang-ch’- 
icn and Chang Kuo-t’ao. Fang Chih-min and Hsiao Shih- 
ping had also begun a movement along the north-eastern 



THE SOVIET MOV^EMENT 173 

army, in the winter of 1928, and out of these emerged the 
Fifth Red Aifny, commander of which was P’eng Teh- 
huai. In addition to P’eng there were Teng P’ing (killed at 
Tsun-yi, Kweichow, during the Long March), Huang 
Kuo-nu (killed in Kwangsi in 1931), and T’ien Teh-jman. 

“Conditions on the mountain, with the arrival of so 
many troops, were becoming very bad. The troops had no 
winter uniforms, and food was extremely scarce. For 
months we lived practically on squash. The soldiers shouted 
a slogan of their own: ‘Down with capitalism, and eat 
squash!’ — for to them capitalism meant landlords and the 
landlords’ squash. Leaving P’eng Teh-huai at Chingkan- 
shan, Chu Teh broke through the blockade established by 
the White troops, and in January^ 1929, our first sojourn 
on the embattled mountain ended. 

“The Fourth Army now began a campaign through the 
south of Kiangsi which rapidly developed successfully. We 
established a Soviet in Tungku, and there met and united 
with local Red troops. Dividing forces, we continued into 
Yungting, Shangheng and Lung Yeh, and established So- 
viets in all those counties. The existence of militant mass 
movements prior to the arrival of the Red Army assured 
our success, and helped to consolidate Soviet power on a 
stable basis very quickly. The influence of the Red Army 
now extended, through the agrarian mass movement and 
partisans, to several other hsien, but the Communists did 
not fully take power there until later on. 

“Conditions in the Red Army began to improve, both 
materially and politically, but there were still many bad 
tendencies. ‘Partisanism,’ for example, was a weakness re- 
flected in lack of discipline, exaggerated ideas of democ- 
racy, and looseness of organization. Another tendency that 
had to be fought was ‘vagabondage’ — a disinclination to 
settle down to the serious tasks of government, a love of 
movement, change, new experience and incident. There 



174 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

were also remnants of militarism, with some of the com- 
manders maltreating or even beating the men, and discrimi- 
nating against those they disliked personally, while show- 
ing favouritism to others, 

“Many of these weaknesses were overcome after the 
convening of the Ninth Party Conference of the Fourth 
Red Army, held in West Fukien in December, 1929. Ideas 
for improvements were discussed, many misunderstandings 
levelled out, and new plans were adopted, which laid the 
foundations for a high n-'pe of ideological leadership in the 
Red Arm)''. Prior to this the tendencies already described 
were very serious, and v^ere utilized by a Trotsk)dst faction 
in the Party and military leadership to undermine the 
strength of the movement. A vigorous struggle was now 
begun against them, and several were depriyed of their 
Party positions and army command. Of these Liu En- 
kung, an army commander, was typical. It was found that 
the)^ intended to destroy the Red Army b)^ leading it into 
difficult positions in battles with the enemy, and after sev- 
eral unsuccessful encounters their plans became quite evi- 
dent. They bitterly attacked our programme and every- 
thing we advocated. Experience having shown their errors, 
they were eliminated from responsible positions and after 
the Fukien Conference lost their influence. 

“This conference prepai'ed the way for the establish- 
ment of the Soviet power in Kiangsi. The following year 
was marked with some brilliant successes. Nearly the \vhoIe 
of southern Kiangsi fell to the Red Army. The base of the 
Central Soviet regions had been established. 

“On Febi'uar)^ 7, 1930, an important local Party con- 
ference was called in South Kiangsi, to discuss the future 
programme of the Soviets. It was attended by local repre- 
sentatives from the Party, the Army and the Government, 
Hei'e the question of the land policy was argued at great 
length, and the struggle against ‘opportunism,’ led by those 



GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 1 75 

opposed to redistribution was overcome. It was resolved to 
carry out land redistribution and quicken the formation of 
Soviets. Until then the Red Army had formed only local 
and district Soviets. At this conference it v^as decided to 
establish the Kiangsi Provincial Soviet Government. To the 
new programme the peasants responded with a warm, en- 
thusiastic support which helped, in the months ahead, to 
defeat the extermination campaigns of the Kuomintang 
armies.” 




6 

Growth of the Red Army 

:jl Ji: 

M ao TSE-TUNG’S account had begun to pass out 
of the category of “personal history,” and to sub- 
limate itself somehow intangibly in the career of a great 
movement in which, though he retained a dominant role, 
you could not see him clearly as a personality. It was no 
longer “I” but “we”; no longer Mao Tse-tung, but the Red 
Army; no longer a subjective impression of the experiences 
of a single life, but an objective record by a b)‘stander con- 
cerned with the mutations of collective human destiny as 
the material of history. 

As his story drew to a close it became more and more 
necessary for me to interrogate him about himself. What 
was be doing at that time.? What office did he hold then? 
What was his attitude in this or that situation? And my 
questioning, generally, evoked such references as there are 
to himself in this last chapter of the narrative: 



176 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

“Gradually the Red Army’s work with the masses im- 
proved, discipline strengthened, and a new technique in 
organization developed. The peasantry everywhere began 
to volunteer to help the revolution. As early as Chingkan- 
shan the Red Army had imposed three simple rules of 
discipline upon its fighters, and these were: prompt obedi- 
ence to orders; no confiscations whatever from the poor 
peasantry; and prompt delivery directly to the Government, 
for its' disposal, of all goods confiscated from the landlords. 
After the 1928 Conference emphatic efforts to enlist the 
support of the peasantry were made, and eight rules were 
added to the three listed above. These were as follows: 

“i. Replace all doors when you leave a house;^ 

“2. Return and roll up the straw matting on which you 
sleep; 

“3. Be courteous and polite to the people and help them 
when you can; 

“4. Return all borrowed articles; 

“5. Replace all damaged articles; 

“6. Be honest in all transactions with the peasants; 

“7. Pay for all articles purchased; 

“8. Be sanitary, and especially establish latrines a safe 
distance from people’s houses. ' 

“The last two rules were added by Lin Piao. These 
eight points were enforced with better and better success, 
and today are still the code of the Red soldier, are memo- 
rized and frequently repeated by him." Three other duties 
M^ere taught to the Red Army as its primary purpose: first, 
to struggle to the death against the enemy; second, to arm 
the masses; third, to raise money to support the struggle. 

^ This order is not so enigmatic as it sounds. The wooden doors of 
a Chinese house are easily detachable, and are often taken down at 
night, put across wooden blocks and used for an improvised bed. 

^ Also sung daily in a Red Army song. 



GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 1 77 

“Early in 1929 several groups of partisans under Li 
Wen-ling and Li Su-chu were reorganized into the Third 
Red Army, commanded by Wang Kung-lu, and with Chu 
Yi as political commissar. During the same period, part of 
Chu Pei-teh’s min-t'iian mutinied and joined the Red Army. 
TheJ'’ were led to the Communist camp by a Kuomintang 
commander, Lo Ping-hui, who was disillusioned about the 
Kuomintang and wanted to join the Red Army. He is now 
commander of the 32nd Red Army of the Second Front 
Army. From the Fukien partisans and nucleus of regular 
Red troops the 12 th Red Army was created under the 
command of Wu Chung-hao, with T’ai Tsung-ling as po- 
litical commissar. Wu was later killed in battle and re- 
placed by Lo Ping-hui. 

“It was at this time that the First Army Corps was or- 
ganized, with Chu Teh as commander and me as political 
commissar. It was composed of the Third Army, the Fourth 
Army commanded by Lin Piao, and the 12 th Army, under 
Lo Ping-hui. Party leadership was vested in a Front Com- 
mittee, of which I was chairman. There were already more 
than 10,000 men in the First Army Corps then, organized 
into ten divisions. Besides this main force, there were many 
local and independent regiments. Red guards and partisans. 

“Red tactics, apart from the political basis of the move- 
ment, explaiiled much of the successful military develop- 
ment. At Chingkanshan four slogans had been adopted, and 
these give the clue to the methods of partisan warfare used, 
out of which the Red Army grew. The slogans were: 

“i. When the enemy advances, we retreat! 

“2. When the enemy halts and encamps, w< trouble 
them! 

“3. When the enemy seeks to avoid a battle, v e attack! 

“4. When the enemy retreats, we pursue! 

“These slogans [of four characters each in Chinese] 



178 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

were at first opposed by many experienced military men, 
who did not agree with the type of tactics advocated. But 
much experience proved that the tactics were correct. 
Whenever the Red Army departed from them, in general, 
it did not succeed. Our forces were small, exceeded from 
ten to twenty times by the enemy; our resources and fight- 
ing materials were limited, and only by skilfully combining 
the tactics of manoeuvring and guerrilla warfare cOuld we 
hope to succeed in our struggle against the Kuomintang, 
fighting from vastly richer and superior bases. 

“The most important single tactic of the Red Army 
v^as, and remains, its ability to concentrate its main forces 
in the attack, and swiftly divide and separate them after- 
wards. This implied that positional v^arfare was to be 
avoided, and every effort made to meet the living forces 
of the enemy while in movement, and destroy them. On 
the basis of these tactics the mobility and the swift power- 
ful ‘short attack’ of the Red Army was developed. 

“In expanding Soviet areas in general the programme of ’ 
the Red Army favoured a wave-like or tidal development, 
rather than an uneven advance, gained by ‘leaps’ or ‘jumps,’ 
and without deep consolidation in the territories gained. 
The policy was pragmatical, just as were the tactics already 
described, and grew out of many years of collective mili- 
tary and political experience. These tactics were severely 
criticized by Li Li-san, who advocated the concentration 
of all weapons in the hands of the Red Army, and the ab- 
sorption of all partisan groups. He wanted attacks rather 
than consolidation; advances without securing the rear; sen- 
sational assaults on big cities, accompanied by uprisings and 
extremism. The Li Li-san line dominated the Party, then, 
outside Soviet areas, and was sufficiently influential to force 
acceptance, to some extent, in the Red Army, against the 
judgment of its field command. One result of it was the 
attack on Changsha and another was the advance on Nan- 



- GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 1 79 

chang. But the Red Army refused to immobilize its parti- 
san groups and open up its rear to the enemy during these 
adventures. 

“In the autumn of 1929 the Red Army moved into 
northern Kiangsi, attacking and occupying many cities, and 
inflicting numerous defeats on Kuomintang armies. When 
within striking distance of Nanchang the First Army Corps 
turned sharply west and moved on Changsha. In this drive 
it met and joined forces with P’eng Teh-huai, who had al- 
ready occupied Changsha once, but had been forced to 
withdraw to avoid being surrounded by vastly superior 
enemy troops. P’eng had been obliged to leave Chingkan- 
shan in April, 1929, and had carried out operations in south- 
ern Kiangsi, resulting in greatly increasing his troops. He 
rejoined Chu Teh and the main forces of the Red Army at 
Juichin in April, 1930, and after a conference it was de- 
cided that P’eng’s Third Army should operate on the 
Kiangsi-Hunan border, while Chu Teh and I moved into 
Fukien. It was in June, 1930, that the Third Army and the 
First Army Corps re-established a junction and began the 
second 'attack on Changsha. The First and Third Army 
Corps were combined into the First Front Army, with Chu 
Teh as Commander-in-Chief and myself as political com- 
missar. Under this leadership we arrived outside the walls 
of Changsha. 

“The Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Revolutionary 
Committee was organized about this time, and I was elected 
chairman. The Red Army’s influence in Hunan was wide- 
spread, almost as much so as in Kiangsi. My name was 
known among the Hunanese peasants, for big rewards were 
offered for my capture, dead or alive, as well as for Chu 
Teh and other Reds. My land^ in Hsiang T’an was con- 
fiscated by the Kuomintang. My wife and my sister, as well 

^ The rent from which Mao used during the Great Revolution fof 
the peasant movement in Hunan. 



l8o GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

as the wives of my two brothers, Mao Tse-hting and Mao 
Tse-tan, and my own son, were all arrested by Ho Chien. 
My wife and younger sister were executed. The othfers 
were later released. The prestige of the Red Army even 
extended to my own village, Hsiang T’an, for I heard the 
tale that the local peasants believed that I would be soon 
returning to my native home. When one day an aeroplane 
passed overhead, they decided it was I. They warned the 
man who was then tilling my land that I had come back to 
look over my old farm, to see whether or not any trees had 
been cut. If so, I would surely demand compensation from 
Chiang Kai-shek, they said. 

“But the second attack on Changsha proved to be a 
failure. Great reinforcements had been sent to the city, and 
it was heavily garrisoned; besides, new troops were pouring 
into Hunan in September to attack the Red Army. Only 
one important battle occurred during the siege, and in it 
the Red Army eliminated two brigades of enemy troops. 
It could not, however, take the city of Changsha, and after 
a few M'^eeks withdrew to Kiangsi. 

“This failure helped to destroy the Li Li-san line, and 
saved the Red Army from what would probably have been 
a catastrophic attack on Wuhan, which Li was demanding. 
The main tasks of the Red Army then were the recruiting 
of new troops, the Sovietization of new rural areas, and, 
above all, the consolidation under thorough Soviet power 
of such areas as already had fallen to the Red Army. For 
such a programme the attacks on Changsha were not neces- 
sary and had an element of adventure in them. Had the 
first occupation been undertaken as a temporary action, 
however, and not with the idea of attempting to hold the 
city and set up a State power there, its effects might have 
been considered beneficial, for the reaction produced on 
the national revolutionary movement was very great. The 



GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY l8r 

error was a strategic and tactical one, in attempting to make 
a base of Changsha while the Soviet power was still not 
consolidated behind it.” 

If it is permissible rudely to interrupt Mao’s narrative 
for a moment, further interesting comment may be offered 
about Li Li-san. A Hunanese and a returned student from 
France, he divided time in Shanghai and Hankow, where 
the Communist Party had “underground” headquarters — 
only after 1931 transferring the Central Committee to the 
Soviet districts. Li was one of the most brilliant (if also 
erratic) of Chinese Communists, and perhaps the nearest 
to a Trotsky that China produced. He dominated the Party 
from 1929 to 1931, when he was removed from the Polit- 
buro and sent to Moscow for “study,” where he still re- 
mains. Like Ch’en Tu-hsiu, Li Li-san lacked faith in the 
rural Soviets, and urged that strong aggressive tactics be 
adopted against strategic big capitals like Changsha, Wu- 
han, and Nanchang. He wanted a “terror” in the villages to 
demoralize the gentry, a “mighty offensive” by the work- 
ers, risings and strikes to paralyze the enemy in his bases, 
and “flank attacks” in the north, from Outer Mongolia and 
Manchuria, backed by the U.S.S.R. Perhaps his greatest 
“sin,” in Moscow’s eyes, was that in 1930 he held China 
to be the “centre” of the world revolution, thus denying 
that role to the Soviet Union. 

To continue: 

“But Li Li-san over-estimated both the military strength 
of the Red Army at that time and the revolutionar}" factors 
in the national political scene. He believed that the revolu- 
tion v/as nearing success and would shorth'^ have power 
over the entire country. This belief was encouraged bv 
the long and exhausting civil war then proceeding between 



1 82 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

Feng Yii-hsiang and Chiang Kai-shek, which made the 
outlook seem highly favourable to Li Li-san. But in the 
opinion of the Red Army the enemy was making prepara- 
tions for a great drive against the Soviets as soon as the 
civil war was concluded, and it was no time for possibly 
disastrous putschism and adventures. This estimate proved 
to be entirely correct. 

“With the events in Hunan, the Red Army’s return to 
Kiangsi, and especially after the capture of Kian, ‘Lilisan- 
ism’ was overcome in the ami)'^; and Li himself, proved to 
have been in error, soon lost his influence in the Party, 
There was, however, a critical period in the army before 
‘Lilisanism’ was definitely buried. Part of the Third Corps 
favoured following out Li’s line, and demanded the separa- 
tion of the Third Corps from the rest of the army. P’eng 
Teh-huai fought vigorously against this tendency, how- 
ever, and succeeded in maintaining the unity of the forces 
under his command and their loyalty to the high command. 
But the 20th Army, led by Liu Ti-tsao, rose in open re- 
volt, arrested the chairman of the Kiangsi Soviet, arrested 
many officers and officials, and attacked us politically, on 
the basis of the Li Li-san line. This occurred at Fu Tien and 
is known as the Fu Tien Incident. Fu Tien being near Kian, 
then the heart of the Soviet districts, the events produced 
a sensation, and to many it must have seemed that the fate 
of the revolution depended on the outcome of this struggle. 
However, the revolt was quickly suppressed, due to the 
loyalty of the Third Army, to the general solidarity of the 
Party and the Red troops, and to the support of the peas- 
antry. Liu Ti-tsao was arrested, and other rebels disarmed 
and liquidated. Our line was re-affirmed, ‘Lilisanism’ was 
definitely suppressed, and as a result the Soviet movement 
subsequently .scored great gains. 

“But Nanking was now thoroughly, aroused to the revo- 
lutionary potentialities of the Soviets in Kiangsi, and at the 



GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 183 

end of 1930 began its First Extermination Campaign^ against 
the Red Army. Enemy forces totalling over 100,000 men 
began an encirclement of the Red areas, penetrating b)^ five 
routes, under the chief command of Lu Ti-p’ing. Against 
these troops the Red Army was then able to mobilize a 
total of about 40,000 men. By skilful use of manoeuvring 
Avarfare we met and overcame this First Campaign, with 
great victories. Following out the tactics of swift concen- 
tration and swift dispersal, we attacked each unit separately, 
using our main forces. Admitting the enemy troops deeply 
into Soviet territory, Ave staged sudden concentrated at- 
tacks, in superior numbers, on isolated units of the Kuo- 
mintang troops, achieving positions of manceuA^re in Avhich, 
momentarily, Ave could encircle them, thus reversing the 
general strategic advantage enjoyed by a numerically 
greatly superior enemy. 

“By January, 1931, this First Campaign had been com- 
pletely defeated. I believe that this Avould not have been 
possible except for tluree conditions achieved by the Red 
Army just before its commencement. First, the consolida- 
tion of the First and Third Army Corps under a centralized 
command; second, the liquidation of the Li Li-san line; and, 
third, the triumph of the Party over the anti-Bolshevik 
(Liu Ti-tsao) faction and other activ^e counter-revolution- 
aries Avithin the Red Army and in the Soviet districts. 

“After a respite of only four months, Nanking launched 
its Second Campaign, under the supreme command of Ho 
Ying-chin, noAV Minister of War. His forces exceeded 
200,000 men, Avho moA^ed into the Red areas by seA^en 
routes. The situation for the Red Army AA^as then thought 
to be A'ery critical. The area of SoAuet poAver Avas A^ery 
small, resources Avere limited, equipment scanty, and enemy 
material strength vastly exceeded that of the Red Army 

This campaign is described in interesting detail in The Com- 
munist Situation in China by Yang Chien (Nanking, 1931). 



/ 

184 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST- 

in every respect. To meet this offensive, however, the Red 
Army still clung to the same tactics that had thus far won 
success. Admitting the enemy columns well into Red terri- 
tory, our main forces suddenly concentrated against the 
second route of the enemy, defeated several regiments, and 
destroyed their offensive power. Immediately afterwards 
we attacked in quick succession the third route, the sixth 
and the seventh, defeating each of them in turn. The fourth 
route retreated without giving battle, and the fifth route 
was partly destroyed. Within fourteen days the Red Army 
had fought six battles, and marched eight days, ending with 
a decisive victory. With the break-up or retreat of the 
other six routes, the first route army, commanded by 
Chiang Kuang-nai and Ts’ai T’ing-k’ai, withdrew without 
any serious fighting. 

“One month later, Chiang Kai-shek took command of 
an army of 300,000 men ‘for the final extermination of the 
“Red-bandits.” ’ He was assisted by his ablest commanders: 
Ch’en Ming-shu, Ho Ying-chin and Chu Shao-liang, each 
of wl,iom had charge of a main route of advance. Chiang 
hoped to take the Red areas by storm — a rapid ‘wiping-up’ 
of the ‘Red-bandits.’ He began by moving his armies 80 H 
a day into the heart of Soviet territory. This supplied the 
very conditions under which the Red Army fights best, and 
it soon proved the serious mistake of Chiang’s tactics. With 
a main force of only 30,000 men, by a series of brilliant 
manoeuvres, our army attacked five different columns in 
five days. In the first battle the Red Army captured many 
enemy troops, and large amounts of ammunition, guns and 
equipment. By September, the Third Campaign had been 
admitted to be a failure and Chiang Kai-shek in October 
withdrew his troops. 

“The Red Army now entered a period of comparative 
peace and growth. Expansion was very rapid. The First 
Soviet Congress was called on December ii, 1931, and the 



GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 1 85 

Central Soviet Government was established, with myself as 
chairman. Chu Teh was elected Commander-in-Chief of 
the Red Army. In the same month there occurred the great 
Ningtu Uprising, when over twenty thousand troops of 
the 28th Route Army of the Kuomintang revolted and 
joined the Red Army. They were led by Teng Ch’ing-tan 
and Tsao Pu-shen. Tsao was later killed in battle in Kiangsi, 
but Teng is today still commander of the Fifth Red Army 
— the Fifth Army Corps having been created out of the 
troops taken in from the Ningtu Uprising. 

“The Red Army now began offensives of its own. In 
1932 it fought a great battle at Changchow, in Fukien, and 
captured the city. In the South it attacked Ch’en Chi-t’ang 
at Nan Hsiang, and on Chiang Kai-shek’s front it stormed 
Lo An, Li Chuan, Chien Ning and T’an Ning. It attacked 
but did not occupy Kanchow. From October, 1932, on- 
ward, and until the beginning of the Long March to the 
North-west, I myself devoted my time almost exclusively 
to work with the Soviet Government, leaving the military 
command to Chu Teh and others. 

“In April, 1933, began the Fourth, and, for Nanking, 
perhaps the most disastrous, of its Extermination Cam- 
paigns.^ In the first battle of this period two divisions were 

^ There is considerable confusion, in many accounts written of the 
anti-Red wars, concerning the number of major expeditions sent 
against the Soviet districts. Some writers have totalled up as many 
as eight different “annihilation drives,” but several of these big mobili- 
zations by Nanking were purely defensive. Red Army commanders 
speak of only five main anti-Red campaigns. These are, with the ap- 
proximate number of Nanking troops directly involved in each, as 
follows: First, December, 1930, to January, 1931, 100,000; Second, 
iVIay to June, 1931, 200,000; Third, July to October,' 1931, 300,000; 
Fourth, April to October, 1933, 230,000; Fifth, October, 1933, to 
October, 1934, 400,000 (over 900,000 troops were mobilized against 
the three main Soviet districts). No major expedition tvas launched 
by Nanking during 1932, when Chiang Kai-shek was using apptoxh 
mately 500,000 troops in defensive positions round the Red districts. 
It was, on the contrar)% a year of big Red offensives. Evidently 



l86 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

disarmed and two divisional commanders were captured. 
The 59th Division was partly destroyed and the 52nd was 
completely destroyed. Thirteen thousand men were cap- 
tured in this one battle at Ta Lung P’ing and Chiao Hui in 
Lo An Hsien. The Kuomintang’s i ith Division, then Chiang 
Kai-shek’s best, was next eliminated, being almost totally 
disarmed, and its commander seriously wounded. These en- 
gagements proved decisive turning-points and the Fourth 
Campaign soon afterwards ended. Chiang Kai-shek at this 
time wrote to Ch’en Ch’eng, his field commander, that he 
considered this defeat ‘the greatest humiliation’ in his life. 
Ch’en Ch’eng did not favour pushing the campaign. He^ 
told people then that in his opinion fighting the Reds was 
a ‘lifetime job’ and a ‘life sentence.’ Reports of this coming 
to Chiang Kai-shek, he removed Ch’en Ch’eng from the 
high command. 

“For his Fifth and Last Campaign, Chiang Kai-shek 
mobilized nearly one million men and adopted new tactics 
and strategy. Already, in the Fourth Campaign, . Chiang 
had, on the recommendation of his German advisers, begun 
the use of the blockhouse and fortifications system. In the 
Fifth Campaign he placed his entire reliance upon it. 

“In this period we made two important errors. The first 
was the failure to unite with Ts’ai T’ing-k’ai’s army in 1933 
during the Fukien Rebellion. The second was the adoption 
of the erroneous strategy of simple defence, abandoning 
our former tactics of manoeuvre. It was a serious mistake 
so meet the vastly superior Nanking forces in positional 
warfare, at which the Red Army was neither technically 
nor spiritually at its best. 

“As a result of these mistakes, and the new tactics and 


Nanking’s defensive operations in 1932, which were, of course, propa- 
gandized as “anti-Red campaigns,” were misunderstood by many 
writers as niajor expeditions. The Reds do not so discuss them, nor 
Chiang Kai-shek. 




GROWTH OF THE RED ARMY 1 8 / 

Strategy of China’s campaign, combined with the over- 
whelming numerical and technical superiority of the Kuo- 
mintang forces, the Red Army was obliged, in 1934, to 
seek to change the conditions of its existence in Kjangsi, 
which were rapidly becoming more unfavourable. Secondly, 
the national political situation influenced the decision to 
move the scene of main operations to the North-west. Fol- 
lowing Japan’s invasion of Manchuria and Shanghai, the 
Soviet Government had, as early as February, 1932, for- 
mally declared war on Japan. This declaration, which could 
not, of course, be made effective, owing to the blockade 
and encirclement of Soviet China by the Kuomintang 
troops, had been followed by the issuance of a manifesto 
calling for a United Front of all armed forces in China to 
resist Japanese imperialism. Early in 1933 the Soviet Gov- 
ernment announced that it would co-operate with any 
White army on the basis of cessation of civil war and at- 
tacks on the Soviets and the Red Army, guarantee of civil 
liberties and democratic rights to the masses, and arming 
of the people for an anti-Japanese war. 

“The Fifth Extermination Campaign began in October, 
1933. In January, 1934, ^he Second All-China Soviet Con- 
gress of Soviets- was convened in Juichin, the Soviet capital, 
and a survey of the achievements of the Revolution took 
place. Here I gave a long report, and here the Central So- 
viet Government, as its personnel exists today, was elected.. 
Preparations soon afterwards were made for the Long 
March. It was begun in October, 1934, just a year after 
Chiang Kai-shek launched his last Campaign — a year of 
almost constant fighting, struggle and enormous losses on 
both sides. 

“By January, 1935, the main forces of the Red Army 
reached Tsun-yi, in Kweichow. For the next four months 
the army was almost constantly moving and the most 
energetic combat and fighting took place. Through many. 



1 88 GENESIS OF A COMMUNIST 

many difficulties, across the longest and deepest and most 
dangerous rivers of China, across some of its highest and 
most hazardous mountain passes, through the country of 
fierce aborigines, through the empty grasslands, through 
cold and through intense heat, through wind and snow and 
rainstorm, pursued by half the White armies of Cliina, 
through all these natural barriers, and fighting its way past 
the local troops of Kwangtung, Hunan, Kwangsi, Kwei- 
chow, Yunnan, Sikong, Szechuan, Kansu and Shensi, the 
Red Army at last reached northern Shensi in October, 1935, 
and enlarged the present base in China’s great North-west. 

“The victorious march of the Red Army, and its tri- 
umphant arrival in Kansu and Shensi with its living forces 
still intact, was due first to the correct leadership of the 
Communist Party, and secondly to the great skill, courage, 
determination and almost super-human endurance and revo- 
lutionary ardour of the basic cadres of our Soviet people. 
The Communist Party of China was, is, and will ever be, 
faithful to Marxist-Leninism, and it will continue its strug- 
gles against every opportunist tendency. In this determina- 
tion lies one explanation of, its invincibility and the cer- 
tainty of its final victory.” 



cj 

PART FIVE; THE LONG MARCH 

1 

The Fifth Campaign 

■ < 

H ere I cannot even outline the absorbing and as yet 
only fragmentarily written history of the six years 
of the Soviets of South China — a period that was destined 
to be a prelude to the epic of the Long March. Mao Tse- 
tung has told briefly of the organic development of the 
Soviets and of the birth of the Red Army. He has told how 
the Communists built up, from a few hundred ragged and 
half-starved but young and determined revolutionaries, an 
army of several tens of thousands of workers and peasants, 
until by 1930 they had become such serious contenders for 
power that Nanking had to hurl its first large-scale offen- 
sive against them. The initial “annihilation drive,” and then 
a second, a third and a fourth, were net failures. In each of 
those campaigns the Reds destroyed many brigades and 
whole divisions of Kuomintang troops, replenished their 
supplies of arms and ammunition, enlisted new warriors, 
and expanded their territory. 

Meanwhile, vdiat sort of life went on beyond the im- 
penetrable lines of the Red irregulars? It is one of the 
amazing facts of our age that during the entire histor)^ of 
the Soviets in South China not a single “outside” foreign 
observ^er entered Red territory — the only Communist-ruled 

189 



THE LONG MARCH 


190 

nation in the world besides the U.S.S.R. Everything that has 
been written about the southern Soviets by foreigners is 
therefore secondary material. But a few salient points are 
now confirmable from accounts both friendly and inimical, 
and these clearly indicate the basis of the Red Army’s sup- 
port. Land was redistributed and taxes were lightened. Col- 
lective enterprise was established on a wide scale;, by 1933 
there were more than 1,000 Soviet co-operatives in Kiangsi 
alone. Unemployment, opium, prostitution, child slavery, 
and compulsory marriage were eliminated, and the living 
conditions of the workers and poor peasants in the peace- 
ful areas were greatly improved. Mass education made 
much progress in the stabilized Soviets. In some counties 
the Reds attained a higher degree of literacy among the 
populace in three or four years than had been achieved 
anywhere else in rural China after centuries. In Hsing Kuo, 
the Communists’ model hsien, there was a populace nearly 
80 per cent literate. 

That much at least has now been established by a wealth 
of independent testimony. But while documentary material 
is becoming abundantly available on other phases of the 
little Soviet Republic, it is impossible to discuss them ex- 
cept in terms of polemics which are not within the scope 
of this book. What might have been accomplished by the 
Reds had they held their bases in the South and strength- 
ened them? Here at once one enters a realm of sheer proph- 
ecy, where the subjective factor naturally conditions the 
conclusions reached. 

Speculation on the southern Soviets in any case is now 
a matter chiefly of academic interest. For, late in October, 
1933, Nanking mobilized for the fifth and the greatest of 
its anti-Red wars, and one year later the Reds were finally 
forced to carry out a general retreat. Nearly everyone then 
supposed it was the end, the Red Army’s funeral march. 
How badly mistaken they were was not to, become mani- 



THE FIFTH CAMPAIGN I9I 

fest for almost two years, when a remarkable comeback, 
seldom equalled in history, was to reach a climax wdth 
events that put into the hands of the Communists the life 
of the Generalissimo who for awhile really had believed 
his own boast — that he had “exterminated the menace of 
Communism.” 

It was not until the seventh year of the fighting against 
the Reds that any notable success crowned the attempts to 
destroy them. Tlie Reds then had actual administrative con- 
trol over a great part of Kiangsi, and large areas of Fukien 
and Hunan. There were other Soviet districts, not physi- 
cally connected with the Kiangsi territory, located in the ' 
provinces of Hunan, Hupeh, Honan, Anhui, Szechuan, and 
Shensi. 

Against the Reds, in the Fifth Campaign, Chiang Kai- 
shek mobilized about 900,000 troops, of whom perhaps 
400,000 — some 360 regiments — actively took part in the 
warfare in the Kiangsi-Fukien area, and against the Red 
Army in the Anhui-Honan-Hupeh (Oyiiwan) area. But 
Kiangsi was the pivot of the whole campaign. Here the 
regular Red Army was able to mobilize a combined strength 
of 180,000 men, including all reser\’^e divisions, and it had 
perhaps 200,000 partisan and Red Guards, but altogether 
could muster a firing power of somewhat less than 100,000 
rifles, no heavy artillery, and a very limited supply of 
grenades, shells, and ammunition, all of which were now 
being made in the Red arsenal at Juichin. 

Chiang adopted a new strategy to make the fullest use 
of his greatest assets — superior resources, technical equip- 
ment, access to unlimited supplies from the outside world 
(to which the Reds had no outlet), mechanized warfare, 
and a modern air force that had come to comprise nearly 
400 navigable war planes. The Reds had captured a few 
of Chiang’s aeroplanes, and they had three or four pilots, 
but they lacked petrol, bombs, and mechanics. Instead of 



THE LONG MARCH 


192 

an invasion of the Red districts and an attempt to take 
them by storm of superior force, which had in the past 
proved disastrous, Chiang now used the majority of his 
troops to surround the “bandits” and impose on them a 
strict economic blockade. It was, therefore, primarily a war 
of exhaustion. 

And it was very costly. Chiang Kai-shek built hundreds 
of miles of military roads and thousands of small fortifica- 
tions, which were made connectable by machine-gun or 
artillery fire. His defensive-offensive strategy and tactics 
tended to diminish the Reds’ superiority in manoeuvring, 
and emphasized the disadvantages of their smaller numbers 
and lack of resources. In effect, in his famous Fifth Cam- 
paign, the Generalissimo built a kind of Great Wall round 
the Soviet districts, which gradually moved inward. Its 
ultimate aim was to encompass and crush the Red Army in 
a stone vise. 

Chiang wisely avoided exposing any large body of. 
troops beyond the fringes of his network of roads and' 
fortifications. They advanced only when very well cov- 
ered by artillery and aeroplanes and rarely moved more than 
a few hundred yards ahead of the noose of forts, which 
stretched through the provinces of Kiangsi, Fukien, Hunan, ■ 
Kwantung and Kwangsi. Deprived of opportunities to de- 
coy, ambush, or outmanoeuvre their enemy in open battle, 
the Reds were obliged to plan a new strategy. They bbgan 
to place their main reliance on positional warfare — and the 
error of this decision, and the reasons for it, will be alluded 
to farther on. 

The Fifth Campaign is said to have been planned largely ^ 
by Chiang Kai-shek’s German advisers, notably General 
Von Falkenhausen, of the German army, and for awhile 
the Generalissimo’s chief adviser. The new tactics were 
thorough, but they were also very slow and expensive. Op- 
erations dragged on for months and still Nanking had not 



THE FIFTH CAMPAIGN 1 93 

Struck a decisive blow at the main forces of its enemy. The 
effect of the blockade, however, was seriously felt in the 
Red districts, and especially the total absence of salt. The 
little Red base was becoming inadequate to repel the com- 
bined military and economic pressure being applied against 
it. The Reds deny it, but I suspect that considerable e.\- 
ploitation of the peasantry must have been necessary to 
maintain the astonishing year of resistance which was put 
up during this campaign. At the same time, it must be 
remembered that their fighters were mostly enfranchised 
peasants and proud owners of newly acquired land. For 
land alone, most peasants in China v'ill fight to the death. 
The Kiangsi people knew that return of the Kuomintang 
meant return of the landlords. 

Nanking believed that its efforts at annihilation were 
about to succeed. The enemy was caged and could not 
escape. Thousands of peasants had been killed in the daily 
bombing and machine-gunning from the air, as well as by 
“purgations” in districts reoccupied by the Kuomintang. 
The Red Army itself, according to Chou En-lai, suffered 
over 60,000 casualties in this one siege, and sacrifice of life 
among the civilian population was terrific. Whole areas 
were depopulated, sometimes by forced mass migrations, 
sometimes by the simpler expedient of mass executions. 
The Kuomintang itself admitted that about i ,000,000 people 
were killed or starved to death in the process of recovering 
Soviet Kiangsi. 

Nevertheless, the Fifth Campaign proved inconclusive. 
It failed in its objective, which was to destroy the living 
forces of tlie Red Army. A Red military conference was 
called at Juichin, and it was decided to withdraw, transfer- 
ring the main Red strength to a new base. The plans for 
this great expedition, which was to last a whole year, were 
complete and efheient. Thev perhaps revealed a certain 
military genius that the Reds had not shown during their 



194 LONG MARCH 

periods of offensive. For it is one thing to command a vic- 
torious advancing army, and quite another to carry through, 
to success a plan calling for retreat under such handicaps 
as those which lay ahead in the now famous Long March 
to the North-west. 

The retreat from Kiangsi evidently was so swiftly and 
secretly managed that the main forces of the Red troops, 
estimated at about 90,000 men, had already been marching 
for several days before the enemy headquarters became 
aware of what was talcing place. They had mobilized in 
southern Kiangsi, withdrawing most of their regular troops 
from the northern front, and replacing them with partisans. 
Those movements occurred always at night. When practi- 
cally the whole Red Army was concentrated near Yiitu, in 
southern Kiangsi, the order was given for the Great March, 
which began on October 16, 1934. 

For three nights the Reds pressed in two columns to 
the west and to the south. On the fourth they advanced, 
totally unexpectedly, almost simultaneously attacking the 
Hunan and Kwangtung lines of fortifications. They took 
these by assault, put their astonished enemy on the run, 
and never stopped until they had occupied the ribbon of 
blockading forts and entrenchments on the southern front. 
This gave them roads to the south and to the west, along 
which their vanguard began its senMtional trek. 

Besides the main strength of the army, thousands of 
Red peasants began this march — old and young, men, 
women, children. Communists and’ non-Communists. The 
arsenal was stripped, the factories were dismantled, ma- 
chinery was loaded onto mules and donkeys — everything 
that was portable and of value went with this strange caval- 
cade. As the march lengthened out, much of this burden 
had to be discarded, and the Reds tell you today that thou- 
sands of rifles and machine-guns, much machinery, much 
ammunition, even much silver, lies buried on their long 



A NATION EMIGRATES 


195 

trail from the south. Some day in the future, they say, Red 
peasants, now surrounded by thousands of policing troops, 
will dig it up again. They await only the signal — and the 
MMr with Japan may prove to be that beacon. 

After the main forces of the Red Army' evacuated 
ICiangsi, it was still many weeks before Nanking troops 
succeeded in occupying the chief Red cities. Tliousands of 
peasant guards and partisans, held together and led by a 
few Red regulars, put up a stiff resistance till the end. The 
heroism of many of these Red leaders, who volunteered to 
stay behind for self-immolation, is memorialized in many 
ways by the Reds today. They provided the rearguard 
action which enabled the main forces to get well under way 
before Nankin^ could mobilize sufficient forces to sur- 
round and annihilate them on the march. Even in 1937 
there were regions in Kiangsi, Fukien, and Kweichow held 
by these fragments of the Red Army, and in the spring the 
'Government announced the beginning of another anti-Red 
campaign for a “final clean-up” in Fukien. 


O- 


2 

A Nation Emigrates 

< 

H aving successfully broken through the first line of 
fortifications, the Red Army set out on its epochal 
year-long trek to the west and to the north, a vari-coloured 
and many-storied expedition that can be described here 
only in briefest outline. The Communists are now writing 
a collective account of the Long iMarch, with contributions 



1^6 the long march 

from dozens whp made it, which already totals over 300,000 
words, and is still incomplete- Adventure, exploration, dis- 
covery, human courage and cowardice, ecstasy and tri- 
umph, suffering, sacrifice, and loyalty, and then through it 
all, like a flame, this undimmed ardour and undying hope 
and amazing revolutionary optimism of those thousands of 
youths who would not admit defeat either by man or na- 
ture or God or death — all this and more are embodied in 
the history of an Odyssey unequalled in modem times. 

The Reds themselves generally speak of it as the “25,- 
000-/7 March,” and with all its twists, turns and counter- 
marches, from the farthest point in Fukien to the end of 
the road in far North-west Shensi, some sections of the 
marchers undoubtedly did that much or more. An accurate 
stage-by-stage itinerary prepared by the First Army Cprps’^ 
shows that its route covered a total of 18,088 li, or 6,000 
miles — about twice the width of the American continent — 
and this figure may be accepted as the average march of ' 
the main forces. It must be remembered that the whole 
journey was covered on foot, across some of the world’s 
most difficult trails, most of them unfit for wheeled traffic, 
across some of the highest mountains and the greatest riv- 
ers of Asia. It was one long battle from beginning to end. 

Four main lines of defence works, supported by strings 
of concrete machine-gun nests and blockhouses, surrounded 
the Soviet districts in South-west China, and the Reds had 
to shatter those before they could reach the unblockaded 
areas to the west. The first line, in Kiangsi, was broken on 
October 21, 1934; second, in Hunan, was occupied on 
November 3, and a week later the third, also in Hunan, fell 
to the Reds after bloody fighting. The Kwangsi and Hunan 
troops gave up the fourth and last line on November 29, 
and the Reds swung northward into Hunan, to begin trek- 

Aji Account of the Long March, First Army Corps, Yuwang 
Pao, August, 1936. 



A NATION EMIGRATES ’ 1 97 

king, in a straight line for Szechuan, where they planned 
to enter the Soviet districts and combine with the Fourth 
Front Army there, under Hsu Hsiang-chien. Between the 
dates mentioned above, nine battles were fought. In all, a 
combination of no regiments had been mobilized in their 
path by Nanking and by the provincial warlords, Chen 
Chi-tang, Ho Chien and Pai Ch’ung-hsi. 

During the march through Kiangsi, Kwangtung, 
Kwangsi, and Hunan, the Reds suffered very heavy losses. 
Their numbers were reduced' by about one-third by the 
time they reached the border of Kweichow province. This 
was due first to the impediment of a vast amount of trans- 
port, 5,000 men- being engaged in that task alone. The van- 
guard u^as very much retarded, and in many cases the 
enemy was given time to prepare elaborate obstructions in 
the line of march. Secondly, from Kiangsi an undeviating 
north-westerly route was maintained, which enabled Nan- 
king to anticipate most of the Red Army’s movements. 

Serious losses as a result of these errors caused the Reds 
to adopt new tactics in Kweichow. Instead of an arrow- 
like advance, they began a series of distracting manoeuvres, 
'SO that it became more and more difficult for Nanking 
planes to identify the day-by-day objective of the main 
forces. Two columns, and sometimes as many as four col- 
umns, engacred in a baffling series of manoeuvres on the 
flanks of the central column, and the vanguard developed 
a pincer-like front. Only the barest and lightest essentials 
of equipment were retained, and night marches for the 
greatly reduced transport corps — a daily target for the air 
bombing — became routine. 

Anticipating an attempt to cross the Yangtze River into 
Szechuan, Chiang Kai-shek withdrew thousands of troops 
from Hupeh, Anhui, and Kiangsi, and shipped them hur- 
riedly westward, to cut off (from the north) the Red 
Army’s route of advance. All crossings were heavily forti- 



198 THE LONG MARCH 

fied; all ferries were drawn to the north bank of the river; 
all roads were blocked; great areas were denuded of grain. 
Other thousands of Nanking troops poured into Kweichow 
to reinforce the opium-soaked provincials of Warlord 
Wang Chia-lieh, A^^hose army in the end was practically 
immobilized by the Reds. Still others were dispatched to 
the Yunnan border, to set up obstacles there. In Kweichow, 
therefore, the Reds found a reception committee of a 
couple of hundred thousand troops, and obstructions 
thrown up ever}avhere in their path. This necessitated two 
great counter-marches across the province, and a wide 
circular movement around the capital. 

Manoeuvres in Kweichow occupied the Reds for four 
months, during which they destroyed five enemy divisions, 
captured the headquarters of Governor Wang, and occu- 
pied his foreign-style palace in Tsun-yi, recruited about 
20,000 men, and visited most of the villages and towns of 
the province, calling mass meetings and organizing Com- 
munist cadres among the youth. Their losses were negli- 
gible, but they still faced the problem ' of crossing the 
Yangtze. By his swift concentration on the Kweichow- 
Szechuan border, Chiang Kai-shek had skilfully blocked 
the short, direct roads that led to the great river. He now 
placed his main hope of exterminating the Reds on the 
prevention of this crossing at any point, hoping to push 
them far into the south-west, or into the Avastelands of 
Tibet. To his various commanders and the provincial war- 
lords he telegraphed: “The fate of the nation and the party 
depends on bottling up the Reds south of the Yangtze.” 

Suddenly, early in May, 1935, the Reds turned south- 
ward and entered Yunnan, where China’s frontier meets 
Burma and Indo-China. A spectacular march in four days 
brought them within ten miles of the capital, Yunnanfu, 
and Warlord Lung Yun (Dragon Cloud) frjintically mo- 
bilized all available troops for defence. Chian^’s reinforce- 



A NATION EMIGRATES ' 1 99 

ments meanwhile moved in from Kweichow in hot pur- 
suit. Chiang himself and Mme. Chiang, who had been stay- 
ing in Yunnanfu, hastily repaired down the French rail- 
Avay toward Indo-China. A big squadron of Nanking bomb- 
ers kept up their daily egg-laying over the Reds, but on 
they came. Presently the panic ended. It was discovered 
that the drive on Yunnanfu had been only a diversion car- 
ried out by a few troops. The main Red forces were mov- 
ing westward, obviously with the intention of crossing the 
I'wer at Lengkai, one of the few navigable points of the 
upper Yangtze. 

Through the wild mountainous country of Yunnan, the 
Yangtze River flows deeply and swiftly between immense 
gorges, great peaks in places rising in defiles of a mile or 
more, with steep walls of rock lifting almost perpendicu- 
larly on either side. The few crossings had all been occu- 
pied long ago by Government troops. Chiang was well 
pleased. He now ordered all boats drawn to the north bank 
of the river to be burned. Then he started his own troops, 
and Lung Yun’s, in an enveloping movement round the 
Red Army, hoping to finish it off forever on the banks of 
this historic and treacherous stream. 

Seemingly unaware of their fate, the Reds continued to 
■ march rapidly westward in three columns towards Lengkai. 
The boats had been burned there, and Nanking pilots re- 
ported that a Red vanguard had begun building a bamboo 
bridge. Chiang became more confident; this bridge-build- 
ing would take weeks. But one evening, quite unobtru- 
sively, a Red battalion suddenly reversed its direction. On 
a phenomenal forced march it covered eighty-five miles in 
one night and day, and in late afternoon descended upon 
the only other possible ferry-crossing in the vicinity, at 
Chou P’ing Fort. Dressed in captured Nanking uniforms, 
the battalion entered the town at dusk without arousing 
comment, and quietly disarmed the garrison. 



2C0 THE LONG MARCH 

Boats had been withdrawn to the north bank — but they 
had not been destroyed! (Why spoil boats, when the Reds 
were hundreds of U distant, and not coming there anyway? 
So the Government troops had reasoned.) But how to get 
one over to the south bank? After dark the Reds escorted 
the village official to the river, and forced him to call out 
to the guards on the opposite side that some Government 
troops had arrived, and wanted a boat. Unsuspectingly, one 
was sent across. Into it piled a detachment of these “Nan- 
king” soldiers, who soon disembarked on the north shore — 
in Szechuan at last. Calmly entering the garrison quarters, 
they found the troops peacefully playing mah-jong, their 
guns resting safely on the walls. In open-mouthed amaze- 
ment the}^ stared as the Reds ordered “Hands up!” and 
pocketed their weapons. They did not for some time com- 
prehend that they were prisoner? of the “bandits” whom 
they had believed to be at least three days distant. 

Meanwhile the main forces of the Red Army had exe- 
cuted a wide counter-march, and by noon of the next day 
the vanguard reached the fort. Crossing was now a simple 
matter. Six big boats worked constantly for nine days. The 
entire army was transported into Szechuan without a life 
lost. Having concluded the operation, the Reds promptly 
destroyed the vessels and lay down to sleep. When Chiang’s 
forces reached the river, two days later, the rear-guard of 
their enemy called cheerily to them from the north bank 
to come on over; the swimming was fine. The Government 
troops were obliged to make a detour of over 200 li to the 
nearest crossing, and the Reds thus shook them from their 
trail. Infuriated,’ the Generalissimo now flew to Szechuan, 
where he mobilized new forces in the path of the oncoming 
horde, hoping to cut them off at one more strategic river — 
the great Tatu. 



' 

3 

The Heroes of Tatu 

r- 

T HE crossing of the Tatu River was the most critical 
single incident of the Long March. Had the Red Army 
failed there, quite possibly it would have been extermi- 
nated. The historic precedent for such a fate already 
existed. On the banks of the remote Tatu the heroes of the 
Three Kingdoms and many warriors since then had met 
defeat, and in these same gorges the last of the T’aiping 
rebels, an army of 100,000 led by Prince Shih Ta-k’ai, was 
in the nineteenth century surrounded and completely de- 
stroyed by the Manchu forces under the famous Tseng 
Kuo-fan. To Warlords Liu Hsiang and Liu Wen-hui, his 
allies in Szechuan, and to his own generals in command of 
the Government pursuit, Generalissimo Chiang now wired 
an exhortation to repeat the histor)^ of the T’aipings. Here, 
inevitably, the Reds would perish.' 

But the Reds also knew about Shih Ta-k’ai, and that the 
main cause of his defeat had been a costly delay. Arriving 
at the banks of the Tatu, Prince Shih had paused for three 
days to honour the birth of his son — an imperial prince. 
Those days of rest had given his enemy the chance to con- 
centrate against him, and to make the swift marches in his 
rear that blocked his line of retreat. Realizing his mistake 

201 



202 THE LONG MARCH 

too late, Prince Shih had tried to break the enemy encircle- 
ment, but it was impossible to manoeuvre in the narrow ter- 
rain of the defiles, and he was erased from the map. 

The Reds determined not to repeat his, error. Moving 
rapidly northward from the Gold Sand River (as the 
Yangtze there is known) into Szechuan, they soon entered 
the tribal country of warlike aborigines, the White and 
Black Lolos of Independent Lololand. Never conquered, 
never absorbed by the Chinese who dwell all round them, 
the turbulent Lolos have for centuries occupied that 
densely forested and mountainous spur of Szechuan whose 
borders are marked by the great southward arc described 
by the Yangtze just east of Tibet. Chiang Kai-shek confi- 
dently counted on a long delay and weakening of the Reds 
here which would enable him to concentrate north of the 
Tatu. Lolo hatred of the Chinese is traditional, and rarely 
has any Chinese army crossed their borders without heavy 
losses or extermination. 

But the Reds had a method. They had already safely 
passed through the tribal districts of the Miao and the Shan 
peoples, aborigines of Kweichow and Yunnan, and had 
won their friendship and even enlisted some tribesmen in 
their army. Now they sent envoys ahead to parley with 
the Lolos. Ell route, they captured several towns on the 
borders of Independent Lololand, where they found a num- 
ber of Lolo chieftains who had been imprisoned as hostages 
by the Chinese militarists. Freed and sent back to their 
people, these men naturally praised the Reds. 

In the vanguard of the Red Army was Commander Liu 
Pei-ch’eng, who had once been an officer in a warlord army 
of Szechuan. Liu knew the tribal people, and their inner 
feuds and discontent. Especially he knew their hatred of 
Chinese, and he could speak something of the Lolo tongue. 
Assigned the task of negotiating a friendly alliance, he en- 
tered their territory and went into conference with the 



THE HEROES OF TATU 203 

chieftains. The Lolos, he said, opposed Warlords Liu 
Hsiang and Liu Wen-hui and the Kuomintang; so did the 
Reds. The Lolos wanted to preserve their independence; 
Red policies favoured autonomy for all the national mi- 
norities of China. The Lolos hated the Chinese because they 
had been oppressed by them; but there were “White Chi- 
nese” and “Red Chinese,” just as there \t'ere ^^^lite Lolos 
and Black Lolos, and it was the White Chinese who had 
always slain and oppressed the Lolos. Should not the Red 
Chinese and the Black Lolos unite against their common 
enemies, the White Chinese? The Lolos listened interest- 
edly. Slyly they asked for arms and bullets to guard their 
independence and help Red Chinese fight the \Vhites. To 
their astonishment, the Reds gave them both. 

And so it happened that not only a speedy but a safe and 
pleasant passage was accomplished. Hundreds of Lolos en- 
listed with the “Red Chinese” to march to the Tatu River 
and fight the common enemy. Some of those Lolos were 
to trek clear to the North-west. Liu Pei-ch’eng drank the 
blood of a newly killed chicken before the high chieftain 
of the Lolos, who drank also, and they swore blood brother- 
hood in the tribal manner. By this vow the Reds declared that 
whosoever should violate the terms of their alliance would 
be even as weak and cowardly as the fowl that they had 
killed. 

Thus a vanguard division of the First Army Corps, led 
by Lin Piao, reached the Tatu Ho. On the last day of the 
march they emerged from the forests of Lololand (in the 
thick foliage of which Nanking pilots had completely lost 
track of them), to descend suddenly on the river town of 
An Jen Ch’ang — just as unheralded as they had come into 
Chou P’ins Fort. Guided over narrow mountain trails by 
the Lolos, the vanguard crept quietly up to the little town, 
and from the heights looked down to the river-bank, and 
saw with amazement and delight one of the three ferry-boats 



204 THE, LONG MARCH 

made fast on the south bank of the river! Once more an 
act of fate had befriended them. 

How did it happen? Now, on the opposite shore, there 
was only one regiment of the troops of General Liu 
Wen-hui, the co-dictator of Szechuan province. Other 
Szechuan troops, as well as reinforcements from Nanking, 
were leisurely proceeding towards the Tatu, but the single 
regiment meanwhile was enough. A squad should have been 
ample, indeed, with all boats moored to the north. But the 
commander of that regiment was a native of the district; 
he knew the country the Reds must pass through, and how 
long it would take them to penetrate to the river. They 
would be many days yet, he told his men. And his wife, you 
see, had been a native of An Jen Ch’ang, so he must cross to 
the south bank to visit his relatives and his friends and to 
feast with them. Thus it happened that the Reds, taking the 
town by surprise, captured the commander, his boat, and 
secured their passage to the north. 

Sixteen men from each of five companies volunteered 
to cross in the first boat and bring back the others, while 
on the south bank the Reds set up machine-guns on the 
mountain-sides and over the river spread a screen of pro- 
tective fire concentrated on the enemy’s exposed positions. 
It was May. Floods poured down the mountains, and the 
river was swift and even wider than the Yangtze. Starting 
far upstream, the ferry took two hours to cross and land 
just opposite the town. From the south bank the villagers 
of An Jen Ch’ang watched breathlessly. They would be 
wiped out! But wait. They saw the voyagers land almost 
beneath the guns of the enemy. Now, surely, they would 
be finished. And yet . . . From the south bank the Red 
machine-guns barked on. The onlookers saw the little party 
climb ashore, hurriedly take cover, then slowly work their 
way up a steep clifi' overhanging the enemy’s positions. There 
they set up their own light machine-guns, and sent a down- 



THE HEROES OF TATU 20 ^ 

pour of lead and hand grenades into the enemy redoubts 
along the river. 

' Suddenly the White troops ceased firing, broke from 
their redoubts, and fled to a.second and then a third line of 
defence. A great murmur went up from the south bank, 
and shouts of “Haof” drifted across the river to the little 
band who had captured the ferry landing. Meanwhile the 
first boat returned, towing two others, and on the second 
trip each carried eighty men. The enemy had fled. Tliat 
day and night, and the next, and the next, those three fer- 
ries of An Jen Ch’ang worked back and forth, until at last 
nearly a division had been transferred to the northern bank. 

But the river flowed faster and faster. The crossing be- 
came more and more difflcult. On the third day it took 
four hours to shift a boatload of men from shore to shore! 
At this rate it would be weeks before the whole army and 
its animals and supplies could be moved. Long be, fore the 
operation was completed they would be encircled. The 
First Army Corps had now crowded into An Jen Ch’ang, 
and behind were the flanking columns, and the transport 
and rear-guard. Chiang Kai-shek’s aeroplanes had found 
the spot, and heavily bombed it. Enemy troops were rac- 
ing up from the south-east; others approached from the 
north. A hurried military conference was summoned by 
Lin Piao. Chu Teh, Alao Tsc-tung, Chou En-lai, and Peng 
Teh-huai had by now reached the river. They took a de- 
cision, and began to carry it out at once. 

Some 400 li to the west of An Jen Ch'ang, where the 
gorges rise very high and the river flows narrow, deep, and 
swift, there is a famous iron-chain suspension bridge called 
the Liu Ting Chiao — the Bridge Fixed by Liu. It is the last 
possible crossing of the Tatu cast of Tibet. Towards this 
the barefoot Reds now set out along a trail that wound 
through the sor^es, at times climbiny several thousand feet, 
again dropping low to the level of the swollen stream it- 



2o6 the long march 

self, and wallowing through \vaist-deep mud. If they cap- 
tured the Liu Ting Chiao the whole army could enter cen- 
tral Szechuan. And if they failed? If they failed they would 
have to retrace their steps through Lololand, re-enter Yun- 
nan, and fight their way westward towards Likiang, on the 
Tibetan border — a detour of more than a thousand li, 
which few might hope to survive. 

As their main forces pushed westward along the south- 
ern bank, the Red division already on the northern bank 
moved also. Sometimes the gorges between them closed so 
narrowly that the two lines of Reds could shout to each 
other across the stream; sometimes that gulf between them 
measured their fear that the Tatu might separate them for 
ever, and they stepped more swiftly. As they wound in 
long dragon files along the cliffs at night their 10,000 
torches sent arrows of light slanting down the dark, in- 
scrutable face of the imprisoning river. Day and night these 
vanguards moved at double-quick, pausing only for brief 
ten-minute rests and meals, when the soldiers listened to 
lectures by their weary political workers, who over and 
over again explained the importance of this one action, ex- 
horting each to give his last breath, his last urgent strength, 
for victory in the test ahead of them. There could be no 
slackening of pace, no half-heartedness, no fatigue. Victory 
was life; defeat, certain death. 

On the second day the vanguard on the right bank fell 
behind. Szechuan troops had set up positions in the road, 
and skirmishes took place. Those on the southern bank 
pressed on more grimly. Presently new troops appeared on 
the opposite bank, and through their field-glasses the Reds 
saw that they were Vfiiite reinforcements, hurrying to the 
Bridge Fixed by Liu! For a Mdiole day these troops raced 
each other along the stream, but gradually the Red van- 
guard, the pick of all the Red Army, pulled away from the 
enemy’s tired soldiers, whose rests were longer and more 



THE HEROES OF TATU 


207 

frequent, whose energy seemed more spent, and ivho after 
all were none too anxious to die over a bridge. 

The Bridge Fixed by Liu was built centuries ago, and 
in the manner of all bridges of the deep rivers of Western 
China. Sixteen heav}'’ iron chains, with a span of some 100 
yards or more, were stretched across the river, their ends 
imbedded on each side under great piles of cemented rock, 
beneath the stone bridgeheads. Thick boards lashed over 
the chains made the road of the bridge, but upon their ar- 
rival the Reds found that half this wooden flooring had 
been removed, and before them only the bare iron chains 
swung to a point midway in the stream. At the northern 
bridgehead an enemy machine-gun nest faced them, and 
behind it were positions held by a regiment of White 
troops. Now that bridge should, of course, have been de- 
stroyed. But the Szechuanese are sentimental about their 
few bridges; it is not easy to rebuild them, and they are 
costly. Of Liu Ting it was said that “the wealth of the 
eighteen provinces contributed to build it.” And, anyxvay, 
who should have thought the Reds would insanely try to 
cross on the chains alone? But that is just what they did. 

No time was to be lost. The bridge must be captured 
before enemy reinforcements arrived. Once more volun- 
teers were called for. One by one Red soldiers stepped 
forward to risk their lives, and, of those who offered them- 
selves, thirty were chosen. Hand grenades and Mausers 
were strapped to their backs, and soon they were swinging 
out above the boiling river, moving hand over hand, cling- 
ing to the iron chains. Red machine-guns barked at the 
enemy redoubts and spattered the bridgehead with bullets. 
The enemy replied with machine-gunning of its own, and 
snipers 'sliot at the Reds tossing high above the water, work- 
ing slowly towards them. The first warrior was hit, and 
dropped into the current below; a second fell, and then a 
third. But, as they drew nearer the chains, the bridge floor- 



2o8 the long march 

ing somewhat protected these dare-to-dies, and most of the 
enemy bullets glanced off, or ended in the cliffs on the op- 
posite bank. 

Never before had the Szechuanese seen Chinese fighters 
like these — men for whom soldiering was not just a rice- 
bowl, but youths ready to commit suicide to win! Were 
they human beings or madmen or gods? wondered the su- 
perstitious Szechuanese. Their own morale was affected; 
perhaps they did not shoot to kill; perhaps some of them 
secretly prayed that they would succeed in their attempt! 
At last one Red crawled up over the bridge flooring, un- 
capped a grenade, and tossed it with perfect aim into the 
enemy redoubt. Desperate, the officers ordered the rest of 
the planking to be torn up. It was already too late. More 
Reds were crawling into sight. Paraffin was thrown on the 
planking, and it began to burn. By then about twenty Reds 
were moving forward on their hands and knees, tossing 
grenade after grenade into the enemy machine-gun nest. 

Suddenly, on the southern shore, their comrades began 
to scream with joy. “Long live the 'Red Army! Long live 
the Revolution! Long live the thirty heroes of Tatu Ho!” 
For the Whites were withdrawing, were in pell-mell flight! 
Running full speed over the remaining planks of the bridge, 
right through the flames licking towards tliem, the assailants 
nimbly hopped into the enemy’s redoubt and turned the 
abandoned machine-gun against the shore. 

More Reds now swarmed over the chains, and arrived 
to help put out the fire and replace the boards. And soon 
afterwards the Red division that had crossed at An Jen 
Ch’ang came into sight, opening a flank attack on the re- 
maining enemy positions, so that in a little while the White 
troops were wholly in flight — either in flight, that is, or 
with the Reds, for about a hundred Szechuan soldiers here 
threw down their rifles and turned to join their pursuers. 
In an hour or two the whole army was joyously tramping 



ACROSS THE GREAT GRASSLANDS 2O9 

and singing its way across the River Tatn into Szechuan. 
Far overhead angrily and impotentiv roared the planes of 
Chiang Kai-shek, and the Reds cried out in delirious chal- 
lenge to them. As the Communist troops poured over the 
river, these planes tried to hit the bridge, but their bombs 
only made pretty splashes in the river. 

For their distinguished bravery the heroes of An Jen 
Ch’ang and Liu Ting Chiao were av'arded the Gold Star, 
highest decoration in the Red Armv of China. Later on I 
was to meet some of them in Ninghsia, and to be amazed 
at their youth, for they v'erc all under nt'enty-five. 


4 

4 

Across the Greet Grasslands 
41s 

S AFELY across the Tatu, the Reds struck ofF into the 
comparative freedom of western Szechuan, where the 
blockhouse system had not been completed, and vdicre the 
.initiative rested largely in their ovm hands. But hardships 
between battles were not over. Another 2,000 miles of 
marching, studded by seven great mountain ranges, still lay 
ahead of them. 

North of the Tatu River the Reds climbed 16,000 feet 
over the Great Snowy Mountain, and in the rarefied air of 
its crest looked to the y^est and saw a sea of snow peaks — 
Tibet. It was already June, and in the lowlands ver}' warm, 
but as they crossed the Ta Hsueh Shan many of those 
poorly clad, thin-blooded southerners, unused to the high 
altitudes, perished from exposure. Harder yet to ascend was 



2 10 THE LONG MARCH 

the desolate Paotung Kang Mountain, up which they liter- 
ally built their own road, felling long bamboos and laying 
them down for a track through a tortuous treacle of waist- 
deep mud. “On this peak,” A 4 ao Tse-tung told me, “one 
army corps lost two-thirds of its transport animals. Hun- 
dreds fell down and never got up.” 

They climbed on. Tlie Chung Lai range next, and more 
lost men and animals. Then they straddled the lovely 
Dream Pen Mountain, and after it the Big Drum, and these 
also took their toll of life. Finally, on July 20, 1935, they 
entered the rich Mou Kung area, in north-west Szechuan, 
and connected with the Fourth Front Army and the Soviet 
regions of the Sungpan. Here at last they paused for a long 
rest, took assessment of their losses, and re-formed their 
ranks. 

The First, Third, Fifth, Eighth, and Ninth Army Corps, 
that had begun the journey in Kiangsi nine months earlier 
with about 90,000 armed men, could now muster beneath 
their hammer-and-sickle banners but 45,000. Not all had 
been lost, strayed or captured. Behind the line of march in 
Hunan, Kweichow, and Yunnan the Red Army had, as 
part of its tactics of defence, left small cadres of regular 
troops to organize partisan groups among, the peasantry, 
and create disturbances and diversionist activity on the 
enemy’s flanks. Hundreds of captured rifles had been dis- 
tributed along the route, and stretching clear from Kiangsi 
to Szechuan were new zones of trouble for Nanking. Ho 
Lung still held his little Soviet area in northern Hunan, and 
had been joined there by the army of Hsiao K’eh. The nu- 
merous newly created partisan detachments began work- 
ing slowdy tou'ards that region. Nanking was not to dis- 
lodge Ho Lung for a whole year, and then only after he 
had been ordered by Red Army headquarters to move into 
Szechuan, an operation which he would complete — ^\’'ia 
Tibet! — against amazing obstacles. 



ACROSS THE GREAT GRASSLANDS ' 211 

The journey of the Kiangsi Reds thus far had provided 
them with much food for reflection. They had won many 
new friends — and made many bitter enemies. Along their 
route they had provisioned themselves by “confiscating” 
the supplies of the rich — the landlords, officials, bureaucrats, 
and big gentry. The poor they had protected. Seizures 
were systematically carried out according to Soviet laws, 
and only the confiscation department of the finance com- 
mission was empowered to distribute the goods that were 
taken. It husbanded the army’s resources, was informed by 
radio of all confiscations made, and assigned quantities of 
provisions for each section of die marchers, who often 
made a solid serpentine of fifty miles or more curling over 
the hills. 

There were big “surpluses” — more than the Reds could 
carry — and these were distributed among the local poor. 
In Yunnan the Reds seized thousands of hams from rich 
packers there, and peasants came from miles round to re- 
ceive their free portions — a new incident in the histor)'- of 
the ham industry. Tons of salt were likewise distributed. 
In Kweichow many duck farms were seized from the land- 
lords and officials, and the Reds ate duck until, in the vmrds 
of one of them, they were “simply disgusted with duck.” 
From Kiangsi they had carried big quantities of Nanking 
notes, and silver dollars and bullion from their State bank, 
and in poor districts in their path they used this money to 
pay for their needs. Land deeds were destroyed, taxes abol- 
ished, and the poor peasantry armed. 

Except for their experiences in western Szechuan, the 
Reds told me they were welcomed everj’Avhere by the 
mass of the peasantry. Their fame spread ahead of them, 
and often the oppressed peasantry sent groups to urge them 
to detour and “liberate” their districts. They had little 
conception of the Red Army’s political programme, of 
course; they only loiew that it was “a poor man’s army.” 



2 12 THE LONG MARCH 

That was enough. Mao Tse-tung told me laughingly of 
one such delectation which arrived to welcome “Su Wei-ai 

O 

Hsien-sheng” — Mr. Soviet!^ These rustics were no more 
ignorant, however, than the Fukien militarist, Lu Hsing- 
pong, who once posted a notice throughout his fiefdom 
offering a reward for the “capture, dead or alive, of Su 
Wei-ai.” Lu announced that this fellow had been doing 
a lot of damage everywhere, and must be exterminated! 

In Maoerhkai and Mokung the southern armies rested 
for three weeks, while the revolutionary military council, 
and representatives of the Party and the Soviet Government, 
discussed plans for the future. It may be recalled that the 
Fourth Front Red Army, which had made its base in 
Szechuan as early as 1933, had originally been foimed in 
the Honan-Hupeh-Anhui Soviet districts. Its march across 
Honan to Szechuan had been led by Hsu Hsiang-ch’ien 
and Chang Kuo-t’ao, two veteran Reds, of whom something 
more shall be said later on. Remarkable successes — and 
tragic excesses — had marked their campaigns in Szechuan, 
the whole northern half of which had once been under 
their sway. At the time of its junction in Mou Kung with 
the southern Bolsheviks, Hsu Hsiang-ch’ien’s army num- 
bered about fifty thousand men, so that the combined Red 
force concentrated in v.^estern Szechuan in July, 1935, was 
nearly 100,000. 

Here the two armies divided, part of the southerners 
continuing northward while the rest remained with the 
Fourth Front Army in Szechuan. There was disagreement 
about the correct course to pursue. Chang Kuo-t’ao and 
Hsu Hsiang-ch’ien favoured remaining in Szechuan and at- 
tempting to reassert -Communist influence south of the 
Yangtze. Mao Tse-tung, Chu Teh, and the majority of the 

^ 57/, the first Chinese character used in transliterating the word 
“Soviet,” is a common family name, and ivei-ai, when suffixed to it, 
might easily seem like a given name. 



ACROSS THE GREAT GRASSLANDS 213 

Cheka were determined to continue into the North-west. 
The period of indecision was ended by two factors. First 
was the rapid completion of an enveloping movement by 
Chiang Kai-shek’s troops, moving into Szechuan from the 
East and from the North, which succeeded in driving a 
wedge between two sections of the Red Army. Second was 
the rapid rise of one of the hurried rivers of Szechuan, 
which then physically divided the forces, and which sud- 
denly became impassable. There were other factors of intra- 
Party straggle involved which need not be discussed here. 

In August, with the First Army Corps as vanguard, the 
main forces from Kiangsi continued the northward march, 
leaving Chu Teh in command in Szechuan, with Hsu 
Hsiang-ch’ien and Chang Kuo-t’ao. The Fourth Front 
Army was to remain there and in Tibet for another year, 
and be joined by Ho Lung’s Second Front Army, before 
making a sensational march into Kansu, which I shall de- 
scribe farther on. At the head of the Red cavalcade that in 
August, 1935, moved towards the Great Grasslands, on the 
border of Szechuan and Tibet, were Commanders Lin Piao, 
P’eng Teh-huai, Tso Chuan, Ch’en Keng, Chou En-lai, 
and Mao Tse-tung, most of the officials from the Kiangsi 
Central Government, and a majority of the members of the 
Central Committee of the Party. They began this last phase 
of the march with about 30,000 men. 

The most dangerous and exciting travel lay before them, 
for the route they chose led through wild country in- 
habited by the independent Mantzu tribesmen, and the no- 
madic Hsifan, a warring people of eastern Tibet. Passing 
into the J^Iantzu and Tibetan territories, the Reds for the 
first time faced a populace united in its hostility to them, 
and their sufferings on this part of the trek exceeded any- 
thing of the past. They had money, but could buy no food. 
They had guns, but their enemies were invisible. As they 
marched into the thick forests and jungles and across the 



214 the long march 

headv/aters of a dozen great rivers, the tribesmen withdrew 
from the vicinity of the march. They stripped their houses 
bare, carried off all edibles, drove their cattle and fowl to 
the plateaus, and simply disinhabited the whole area. 

A few hundred yards on either side of the road, how- 
ever, it was quite unsafe. Many a Red who ventured to 
forage for a sheep never returned. The mountainfeers hid in 
the thick bush and sniped at the marching “invaders.” They 
climbed the mountains, and when the Reds filed through 
the deep, narrow, rock passes, where, sometimes only one 
or two could pass abreast, the Mantzu rolled huge boulders 
down to crush them and their animals. Here were no 
chances to explain “Red policy towards national minori- 
ties,” no opportunities for friendly alliance! The Mantzu 
Queen had an implacable traditional hatred for Chinese of 
any variety, and recognized no distinctions between Red 
and White. She threatened to boil alive any one who 
helped the travellers. 

Unable to get food except by capturing it, the Reds were 
obliged to make war for a few cattle. They had a saying 
then that “to buy one sheep costs the life of one man.” But 
from the Mantzu fields they harvested green Tibetan wheat, 
and vegetables such as beets and turnips — the latter of an 
enormous size that would “feed fifteen men,” according to 
Mao Tse-tung. On such meagre supplies they equipped 
themselves to cross the Great Grasslands. “This is our only 
foreign debt,” Mao said to me humorously, “and some day 
we must pay the Mantzu and the Tibetans for the provi- 
sions we were obliged to take from them.” Only by captur- 
ing tribesmen could they find guides through the country. 
But of these guides they made friends, and after the Mantzu 
frontier was crossed they continued the journey. Some of 
them are nou' students in the Communist Party School in 
Shensi, and will one day return to their land to tell the 
people the difference between “Red Chinese” and White. 



ACROSS THE GREAT GRASSLANDS 215 

In the Grasslands there was no human habitation for 
ten days. Almost perpetual rain falls over this swampland, 
and it is possible to cross its centre only by a maze of nar- 
row footholds known to the native mountaineers who led 
the Reds. More animals were lost, and more men. Many 
foundered in the weird sea of wet grass, and dropped from 
sight into the depth of the swamp, beyond reach of their 
comrades. There was no firewood; they were obliged to 
eat their green wheat and A^egetables raw. There were even 
no trees for shelter, and the lightly equipped Reds carried 
no tents. At night they huddled under bushes tied together, 
which gave but scant protection against the rain. But from 
this trial, too, they emerged triumphant— more so, at least, 
than the White troops, who pursued them, lost their way, 
and turned back, with only a fraction of their number in- 
tact. 

The Red Army now reached the Kansu border. Several 
battles still lay ahead, the loss of any one of which might 
hav^e meant decisive defeat. More Nanking, Tungpei, and 
Moslem troops had been mobilized in southern Kansu to 
stop their march, but they managed to break through all 
these blockades, and in the process annexed hundreds of 
horses from the Moslem cavalry which people had con- 
fidently predicted would finish them once and for all. Foot- 
sore, weary, and at the limit of human endurance, they 
finally entered northern Shensi, just below the Great Wall. 
On October 20, 1935, a year after its departure from Ki- 
angsi, the vanguard of the First Front Army connected 
with the 25th, 26th, and 27th Red Armies, which had al- 
ready established a small base of Soviet pov'er in Shensi in 
1933. Numbering less than 20,000 survdvors now, they sat 
down to realize the significance of their achievement. 

The statistical recapiuilation^ of the Long March is im- 
pressive. It shoves that there was an average of almost a 

^An Account of the Long March, op. cit. 



2i6 the long march 

skirmish a day, somewhere on the line, while altogether 
fifteen whole days were devoted to major pitched battles. 
Out of a total of 368 days en route ^ 235 were consumed in 
marches by day, and 18 in marches by night. Of the 100 
days of halts — many of which were devoted to skirmishes 
— 56 days were spent in north-western Szechuan, leaving 
only 44 days of rest over a distance of about 5,000 miles, or 
an average of one halt for every 114 miles of marching. 
The mean daily stage covered was 71 //, or nearly, 2 4 miles 
— a phenomenal pace for a great army and its transport to 
averciQ-e over some of the most hazardous terrain on earth. 

o 

Altogether the Reds crossed 18 mountain ranges, five of 
which were perennially snow-capped, and they crossed 24 
rivers. They passed through 12 different provinces, oc- 
cupied 62 cities, and broke through enveloping armies of 
10 different provincial warlords, besides defeating, eluding, 
or outmanceuvring the various forces of Central Govern- 
ment troops sent against them. They entered and success- 
fully crossed six different aboriginal districts, and pene- 
trated areas through which no Chinese army had gone for 
scores of years. 

However one may feel about the Reds and what they 
represent politically (and here is plenty of room for argu- 
ment!), it is impossible to deny recognition of their Long 
March — the Ch’ang Cheng, as they call it — as one of the 
great exploits of military history. In Asia only the Mongols 
have surpassed it, and in the last three centuries there has 
been no similar armed vugration of a nation with the ex- 
ception, perhaps, of the amazing Fliglit of the Torgut, of 
which Sven Hedin tells in his JehoJ, City of Emperors. 
Hannibal’s march over the Alps looks like a holiday ex- 
cursion beside it. A more interesting comparison is Na- 
poleon’s retreat from Moscow, when the Grand Army was 
utterly broken and demoralized. 



ACROSS THE GREAT GRASSLANDS 21 J 

'WTiile the Red Army’s March to the North-west was 
unquestionably a strategic retreat, it can hardly be called a 
major disaster, for the Reds finally reached their objective 
with their nucleus still intact, and their morale and political 
will evidently as strong as ever. The Reds themselves de- 
clared, and apparently believed, that they M^ere advancing 
towards the anti-Japanese front, and this was a psychologi- 
cal factor of great importance. It helped them turn what 
might have been a demoralized retreat into a spirited march 
of victory. Historj^ has subsequently shown that they v^cre 
right in emphasizing what was undoubtedly the second 
fundamental reason for their migration: an advance to the 
strategic North-west, a region which they correctly fore- 
saw was to play a determining role in the immediate des- 
tinies of China, Japan, and Soviet Russia. This skilful propa- 
gandive manoeuvre must be noted as a piece of brilliant 
political strategy. It was to a large e.vtent responsible for 
the successful conclusion of the heroic trek. 

In one sense this mass migration was the biggest armed 
propaganda tour in history. The Reds passed through prov- 
inces populated by more than 200,000,000 people. Between 
battles and skirmishes, in every town occupied, they called 
great mass meetings, gave theatrical performances, heavily 
“ta.ved” the rich, freed many slaves (some of wJiom joined 
the Red Army), preached “liberty, equality, democracy,” 
confiscated the property of the “traitors” (officials, big 
landlords, and tax-collectors) and distributed their goods 
among the poor. Millions of peasants have now seen the 
Red Army and heard it speak, and are no longer afraid of 
it. The Reds e.xplained the aims of agrarian revolution and 
their anti-Japanese policy. They armed thousands of peas- 
ants, and left cadres behind to train the Red partisans, who 
have kept Nanking’s troops busy ever since. .Many thou- 
sands dropped our on the long and heaitbrcaking march. 



THE LONG ALARCH 


218 

but thousands of others — ^farmers, apprentices, slaves, de- 
serters from the Kuomintang ranks, workers, all the disin- 
herited — joined in and filled the ranks. 

Some day someone will write the full epic of this excit- 
ing expedition. Meanwhile I must get on with my story, 
for we have now brought the Reds together in the North- 
west. As epilogue, I offer a free translation of a classical 
poem about this 6,000-mile excursion, done by Chairman 
jMao Tse-tung — a rebel who can write verse as well as lead 
a crusade: 

'The Red Army, never jearing the challengmg Long 
March, 

Looked lightly on the many peaks and rivers. 

Wu Lianas Range rose, lowered, rippled. 

And green-tiered were the rounded steps of Wu Meng. 

W ami-beating the Gold Sand Rivefs waves against the 
rocks. 

And cold the iron-chain spans of Tatu’s bridge. 

A thousand joyous li of freshening snow on Min Shan, 

And then, the last pass vanquished. Three Armies smiled! 



1 = 

PART SIX: RED STAR IX THE NORTH-WEST 

/ 

The Shensi Soviets: Beginnings 



W HILE the Communists in Kiangsi, Fukien, and 
Hunan were gradually building a base for their op- 
position to Nanking, Red Armies appeared in other widely 
scattered parts of China. Of these, the biggest single area 
was the Honan-Anhui-Hupeh Soviet, which covered a good 
part of those three rich provinces of the central Yangtze 
valley, and embraced a population of more than z,ono,ooo 
people. The Red Army there began under the command of 
Hsu Hai-tung, and later on, to lead it, came Hsu Hsiang- 
ch’ien, a graduate of the first class of Whampoa Academy, 
a former colonel in the Kuomintang Arm)% and a veteran of 
the Canton Commune. 

Far in the mountains to the north-west of them, another 
Whampoa cadet, Liu Tzu-tan, was laying the foundations 
for the present Soviet areas in Shensi, Kansu, and Ninghsia. 
A modern Robin Hood, with the mountaineer’s hatred of 
rich men, Liu Tzu-tan’s name was becoming among the 
poor a promise, and among landlords and moneylenders the 
scourge of the gods. 

This chaotic v^arrior tvas bom in the hill-cradled town 
of Pao An, north Shensi, the son of middle-class peasants. 
He went to high school in Vulin, which stands under the 

219 



2 20 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

shadow of the Great Wall, and is the seat of Shensi’s pros- 
perous trade with the cai'avans of Mongolia. Leaving Yulin, 
Liu Tzu-tan secured an appointment to the AVhampoa Acad- 
emy in Canton, completed his course there in 1926, and be- 
came a Communist and a young officer in the Kuomintang. 
With the Nationalist Expedition as far as Hankow, he was 
there when the split occurred in the Kuomintang-Commu- 
nist alliance. 

In 1927, following the Nanking coup d’etat, he fled from 
the “purgation,” and worked secretly for the Communist 
Party in Shanghai. Returning to his native province in 1928, 
he re-established connections with some of his former com- 
rades, then in the Kuominchun, the “People’s Army,” of 
General Feng Yii-hsiang. Next year he led a peasant uprising 
in south Shensi. This broke out near Hua Hsien — ^where in 
the recent North-west revolt Nanking bombers attacked a 
vanguard of Tungpei troops, and did much damage. Al- 
though Liu’s uprising was sanguinarily suppressed, out of it 
grew the nucleus of the first guerrilla bands of Shensi. 

Liu Tzu-tan’s career from 1^29 till 1932 was a kaleido- 
scope of defeats, failures, discouragements, escapades, ad- 
venture, and remarkable escapes from death, interspersed by 
periods of respectability as a reinstated officer. Several small 
armies under him were completely destroyed. Once he was 
made head of the min-thian at Pao An, and he used his office 
to arrest and execute several landlords and moneylenders. 
Strange caprice, for a min-thian leader! The magistrate of 
Pao An was dismissed, and Liu fled, with but three followers, 
to a neighboring hskn. There one of General Feng Yii- 
hsiang’s officers invited them to a banquet, in the midst of 
which Liu and his friends disarmed their hosts, seized twenty 
guns, and made off to the hills, where he soon' collected a 
following of about 300 men. 

This little army was surrounded, Ijowever, and Liu sued 
for peace. His offer was accepted, and he became a colonel 



THE SHENSI SOVIETS; BEGINNINGS 221 

in the Kuomintang Army, with a garrison post in west 
Shensi. Again he began an anti-landlord movement, and 
again he was outlawed, this time arrested. Owing chiefly to 
his influence in the Shensi Ke Lao Hui he was pardoned once 
more, but his troops were reorganized into a transportation 
brigade, of which he was made commander. And now the 
incredible happened: for the third time Liu Tzu-tan re- 
peated the error of his ways. Some landlords in his district, 
long accustomed to tax-exemption (a more or less “heredi- 
tary right” of landlords in Shensi), refused to pay taxes. Liu 
promptly arrested a number of them, with the result that the 
gentry rose up in arms, and demanded that Sian remove and 
punish him. His troops were surrounded and disarmed. 

Finally he was driven back to Pao An with a price on his 
head — but followed bv many young Communist officers and 
men from his own brigade. Here at last he set about organ- 
izing an independent army under a Red flag in 1931, took 
possession of Pao An and Chung Yang counties, and rapidly 
pushed operations in north Shensi. Government troops sent 
against him vet)’- often turned over to the Reds in battle; 
deserters even drifted across the YelloM' River from Shansi 
to join this outlaw whose dare-deviltry, courage, and im- 
petuousness soon won him fam.e throughout the North-west 
and created the usual legend that he was “invulnerable to 
bullets.” 

From all independent testimony I could get, there seems 
no doubt that in the first year or two of struggle in Shensi 
the killing of officials, tax-collectors, and landlords was ex- 
cessive. Unleashing long-hushed furj'-, the armed peasants 
raided, plundered, carried off captives, whom they held for 
ransom in their fortified areas, and conducted themselves 
much like ordinary bandits. But by 1932 Liu Tzu-tan’s fol- 
lowers had occupied eleven counties in the loess hills of 
northern Shensi, and the Communist Party had organized a 
poHtical department at Yulin, to direct Liu’s troops. Early 



222 


IN THE NORTH-WEST 

in 1933, the first Shensi Soviet and a regular administration 
were established, and a programme was attempted similar to 
that in Kiangsi. 

In 1934 and 1935, these Shensi Reds expanded consider- 
ably, improved their armies, and somewhat stabilized condi- 
tions in their districts. A Shensi provincial Soviet Govern- 
ment was set up, a Party training school established, and 
military headquarters were located at An Ting. The Soviets 
opened their own bank and post office and began to issue 
crude money and stamps. In the completely Sovietized areas 
a Soviet economy was begun, landlords’ land was confiscated 
and redistributed, all surtaxes were abolished,, co-operatives 
were opened, and a call was sent out by the Party to furnish 
teachers for primary schools. 

Meanwhile Liu Tzu-tan moved well south of the Red 
base towards the capital. He occupied Lin T’ung, just out- 
side Sianfu, and besieged the city for some days, without 
success. A column of Reds pushed down to southern Shensi, 
and established Soviets in several counties there. They had 
some bad defeats and reverses in battles with General Yang 
Hu-cheng (later to become the Reds’ ally), and they had 
some victories. As discipline increased in the army, and ban- 
dit elements were eliminated, support for the Reds deepened 
among the peasantry. By the middle of 1935 the Soviets con- 
trolled twenty-nvo counties in Shensi and Kansu. The 26th 
and 27th Red Armies, with a total of over 5,000 men, were 
now under Liu Tzu-tan’s command, and could establish con- 
tact by radio with the main forces of the Red Army in the 
south and in the west. As the southern Reds began to with- 
draw from their Kiangsi-Fukien base, these hillmen of 
Shensi greatly strengthened themselves, until in 1935 Chiang 
Kai-shek was forced to send his vice-commander-in-chief. 
Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang, to lead a big army against them. 

Late in 1934 the 25th Red Army, under Hsu Llai-tung, 
left Llonan with some 8,000 men. By October it had reached 



THE SHENSI SOVIETS: BEGINNINGS 223 

south Shensi and connected with about i,ooo Red partisans 
in that area who had been armed by Liu Tzu-tan. Hsu en- 
camped for the winter there, helped the partisans to build a 
regular army, fought several successful battles u'ith General 
Yang Hu-cheng’s troops, and armed the peasants in five coun- 
ties of south Shensi. A provisional Soviet Government was 
established, with Cheng Wei-shan, a twenty-three-year-old 
member of the Cheka of Shensi province, as chairman, and 
Li Lung-kuei and Cheng Shan-jui as commanders of two in- 
dependent Red brigades. Leaving them to defend this area, 
Hsu Hai-tung then moved into Kansu with his 25th Army, 
and fought his way into the Soviet districts through thou- 
sands of government troops, capturing five county seats en 
route and disarming two regiments of Mohammedan troops, 
under General Ma Hung-ping. 

On July 25, 1935, the 25th, 26th, and 27th Armies united 
near Yung Ch’ang, north Shensi. Their troops were reorgan- 
ized into the 1 5th Red Army Corps, with Hsu Hai-tung as 
commander and Liu Tzu-tan as vice-commander, and chair- 
man of the Shensi-Kansu-Shansi Revolutionary Military 
Committee. In August, 1935, this army corps met and de- 
feated two divisions of Tungpei (Manchurian) troops, un- 
der General Wang Yi-che. New recruits were added, and 
much-needed guns and ammunition. 

And now happened a curious thing. In August there 
came to north Shensi a delegate of the Central Committee of 
the Communist Party, a stout young gentleman named 
Chang Ching-fu. According to my informant, who was then 
a staff officer under Liu Tzu-tan, this Mr. Chang (nick- 
named Chang the Corpulent) was empowered to “reorgan- 
ize” the Party and the Army. He was a kind of super- 
inspector. 

Chang 'the Corpulent proceeded to collect evidence to 
prove that Liu Tzu-tan had not followed the “Party line.” 
He “tried” Liu, and demanded his resignation from all posts. 



2 24 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

Now it is either ridiculous or miraculous, or perhaps both, 
but in any case it is a striking example of “Party discipline” 
that Liu Tzu-tan did not put Mr. Chang against a wall as an 
interloper for presuming to criticize him, but he quietly ac- 
cepted his sentence, retired from all active command, and 
went, Achilles-like, to sulk in his cave in Pao An! Mr. Chang 
also ordered the arrest and imprisonment of more than loo 
other “reactionaries” in the Party and the Army and quietly 
sat back w^cll satisfied with himself. 

It was into this queer scene that the vanguard of the 
southern Reds, the First Army Corps, headed by Lin Piao, 
Chou En-lai, P’eng Teh-huai, and Mao Tse-tung, entered in 
October, 1935. Shocked at the amazing situation, they called 
for a re-examination of evidence, found most of it baseless, 
discovered that Chang Ching-fu had exceeded his orders and 
been misled bv “reactionaries” himself. They promptly re- 
instated Liu and all his confederates. Chang the Corpulent 
A\T.s himself arrested, tried, imprisoned for a term, and later 
given menial tasks to perform. 

Thus it happened that vdien, early in 1936, the combined 
Red Armies attempted their famous “anti- Japanese” expedi- 
tion, crossed tlie river, and invaded neighbouring Shansi, 
Liu Tzu-tan was again in command. He distinguished him- 
self in that remarkable campaign during which the Reds oc- 
cupied over eighteen counties of the so-called “model prov- 
ince” in two months. But the reports of his death on that 
expedition — unlike many others — were no mere wish-fan- 
cies of the Kuomintang press. He was fatally wounded in 
March, 1936, when he led a raiding-party against an enemy 
fortification, the capture of Avhich enabled the Red Army 
to cross the Yellow River. He was carried- back to Shensi. 
Liu Tzu-tan died gazing upon the hills he had roamed and 
loved as a boy, and among the mountain people he had led 
along the road he believed in, the road of revolutionary 
struggle. He was buried at Wa Ya Pao, and the Soviets re- 



. DEATH AND TAXES 225 

named a county of their Red China after him — ^Tzu-tan 
hsien. 

In Pao An I met his widow and his child, a beautiful little 
girl of six. The Reds had tailored her a special uniform; she 
wore an officer’s belt, and a red star on her cap. She was the 
idol of everybody there. Young Liu carried herself like a 
field-marshal and she was mightily proud of her “bandit” 
father. 

But, although Liu Tzu-tan was the personality round 
which these Soviets of the North-west grew up, it was not 
Liu, but the conditions of life itself, which produced this 
convnlsive movement of his people. And to understand 
whatever success they have had it is necessary not so much 
just now to look at what these men fought for, as to examine 
what they fought against. 



2 

Death and Taxes 



D uring the great Nortlr-west famine, which lasted 
roughly for three years, and affected four huge prov- 
inces, I visited some of the drought-stricken areas in Suijman, 
on the edge of Mongolia, in June 1929. How many people 
starved to death in those years I do not accurately know, 
and probably no one will ever know; it is forgotten now. A 
conservative semi-official figure of 3,000,000 is often ac- 
cepted, but I am not inclined to doubt other estimates rang- 
ing as high as 6,000,000. 

This catastrophe passed hardly noticed in the Western 



226 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

world, or even in the coastal cities of China, but a few cou- 
rageous men of the China Internatipnal Famine Relief Com- 
mission — many Chinese and some foreigners like Edwards 
and O. J. Todd and wonderful old Dr. Ingram — risked their 
skins in those typhus-infested districts to try to salvage a 
little of the human wreckage. I spent some days with them, 
passing through cities of death, across a once fertile country- 
side turned into desert wasteland, through a land of naked 
horror. 

I was twenty-three. I had come to the East looking for 
the “glamour of the Orient,” I suppose. I believe I fancied 
myself an adventurer, and thi^ excursion to Suiyuan had be- 
gun as something like that. But here for the first time in my 
life I came abruptly upon men who were dying because they 
had nothing to eat. In those hours of nightmare I spent in 
Suiyuan I saw thousands of men, women, and children starv- 
ing to death before my eyes. 

Have you ever seen a man — a good honest man who has 
worked hard, a “law-abiding citizen,” doing, no serious harm 
to anyone — when he has had no food for more than a 
month? It is a most agonizing sight. His dying flesh hangs 
from him in wrirtkled folds; you can clearly see every bone ^ 
in his body; his eyes stare out unseeing, and even if he is a 
youth of twenty he moves like an ancient crone, dragging 
himself from spot to spot. If he has been lucky he has long 
ago sold his wife and daughters. He has also sold everything 
he owns — the timber of his house itself, and most of his 
clothes. Sometimes he has, indeed, even sold the last rag of 
decency, and he sways there in the scorching sun,, his tes- 
ticles dangling from him like withered olive-seeds — the last 
grim jest to, remind you that this was once a man! 

Children are even more pitiable, with their little skele- 
tons bent over and misshapen, their crooked bones, their 
little arms like twigs, and their purpling bellies, filled with 
bark and sawdust, protruding like tumours. Women lie 



DEATH AXD TAXES 227 

slumped in corners, waiting for death, their black blade-like 
buttocks protruding, their breasts hanging like collapsed 
sacks. But there are, after all, not many women and girls. 
Most of them have died or been sold. 

I don’t mean to dramatize horror. These are things I saw 
myself and shall never forget. Millions of people died that 
way in famine, and thousands more still die in China today 
like that. I saw fresh corpses on the streets of Saratsi, and in 
the villages I saw shallow graves where victims of famine 
and disease were laid bv the dozens. But these were not the 
most shocking things after all. The shocking thing was that 
in many of those towns there were still rich men, rice- 
hoarders, wheat-hoarders, money-lenders, and landlords, 
with armed guards to defend them, while they profiteered 
enormously. The shocking thing was that in the cities — 
where officials danced or played with sing-song girls — there 
was grain and food, and had been for months; that in Peking 
and Tientsin and elsewhere were thousands of tons of wheat 
and millet, collected (mostly by contributions from abroad) 
by the Famine Commission, but which could not be shipped 
to the starving. Why not? Because in the North-west there 
were some militarists who wanted to hold all of their rolling- 
stock and would release none of it towards the east, while in 
the east there were other Kuomintang generals who would 
send no rolling-stock westward — even to starving people — 
because they feared it would be seized by their rivals. 

While this famine raged the Commission decided to 
build a big canal (with American funds) to help flood some 
of the lands baked by drought. The officials gave them every 
co-operation — and promptly began to buy for a few cents 
an acre all the lands to be irrigated. A flock of vultures de-' 
scended upon this benighted country, and purchased from 
the starving farmers thousands of acres for the taxes in ar- 
rears, or for a few coppers, and held it to await tenants and 
rainy days. 



228 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

Yet the great majority of those people who died did so 
without any act of protest! 

“Why don’t they revolt?” I asked myself. “Why don’t 
they march in a great army and attack the scoundrels who 
can tax them but cannot feed them, w^ho can seize their lands 
but cannot repair an irrigation canal? Or why don’t they 
sweep into the great cities, and plunder the wealth of the 
rascals who buy their daughters and wives, the men who 
continue to gorge themselves on elaborate thirty-six-course 
banquets while honest men starve? Why not?” 

I was profoundly puzzled by their passivity. For a while 
I thought nothing would make a Chinese fight. 

I was mistaken. The Chinese peasant is not passive; he is 
not a coward. He will fight when he is given a method, an 
organization, leadership, a workable programme, hope — and 
arms. The development of “Communism” in China has 
proved that. Against the above background, therefore, it 
should not surprise us to see Communists especially popular 
in the North-west, for conditions there have enjoyed no 
more fundamental improvement for the mass of the peas- 
antry than elsewhere in China. 

Evidence to this effect has been vividly documented in a 
quarter where you might least expect it. Here I refer to the 
brilliant report^ prepared by Dr. A. Stampar, the distin- 
guished health expert sent by the League of Nations as ad- 
viser to the Nanking Government. It is the best thing avail- 
able on the subject. Dr. Stampar toured the Kuomintang 
areas of Shensi and Kansu, and his reports are based on his 
own observations as well as official data opened for him. 

He points out that “in the year 240 b.c. an engineer called 
Cheng Kuo is said to have constructed a system for irrigat- 

^ The Noj'th-xvestcni Provinces and their Possibilities of DeveJop- 
ment. by Dr. A. Stampar (.Nanking, July, 1954, published privately 
by tlie Nkational Economic Council). Unfortunatcl)', like many of the 
illuminating reports of Dr. Stampar and other League ej.'perts on parts 
of South and Central China, this volume is not available to the public. 



DEATH AND TAXES 229 

ing nearly a million acres” in the historic Wei valley of 
Shensi, cradle of the Chinese race, but that “this system was 
neglected; the dams collapsed, and, though new works were 
from time to time carried out, the amount of territory irri- 
gated at the end of the Manchu Dynasty (1912) was less 
than 20,000 moiC ' — about 3,300 acres! Figures he obtained 
showed that during the great famine 62 per cent of the pop- 
ulation died outright imone county of Shensi; in another, 75 
per cent; and so on. He quotes official estimates revealing 
that 2,ooo;ooo people starved in Kansu alone — about 20 per 
cent of the population. And many of these deaths could have 
been prevented had officials prohibited grain-hoarding, and 
had not rival militarists interfered with shipments of famine- 
relief supplies. 

To quote from this Geneva investigator ad lib. on condi- 
tions in the North-west before the Reds arrived: 

“In the famine of 1930 twenty acres of land could be 
purchased for three days’ food-supply. Making use of tliis 
opportunity, the wealthy classes of the province [Shensi] 
built up large estates, and the number of owner-cultivators 
diminished. The following extract from the report for 1930 
of iMr. Findlay Andrev' of the China International Famine 
Relief Commission conveys a good impression of the situa- 
tion in that year: 

“ ‘. . . The external appearances of the Province have 
much improved on those of last year. Why? Because in this 
particular section of Kansu with which our work deals, 
death from starvation, pestilence, and sword have doomed 
during the past two years such large numbers of the popu- 
lation that the very demand for food has considerably 
lessened.’ ” 

Much land has become waste, much has been concen- 
trated in the hands of landlords and officials. Kansu espe- 
cially has “surprisingly large” areas of cultivable but un- 
cultivated land. “Land during the famine of 1928-1930 was 



2 3^ IN THE NORTH-WEST 

bought at extremely cheap rates by landowners who, since 
that period, have I'ealized fortunes by the execution of the 
Wei Pei Irrigation project.” 

“In Shensi it is considered a mark of honour to pay no 
land tax, and wealthy landowners are therefore as a rule ex- 
empted. ... A practice which is particularly undesirable is 
to claim arrears of taxes, for the period during which they 
were absent, from the farmers who abandoned their land 
during famines, the farmers being forbidden to resume pos- 
session until their arrears are paid.” 

Dr. Stampar finds that Shensi farmers (evidently exclud- 
ing the landlords, who are “as a rule exempted”) have to pay 
land taxes and surtaxes amounting to about 45 per cent of 
their income, while other taxes ^‘represent a further 20 per 
cent”; and “not only is taxation thus fantastically heavy, but 
its assessment appears to be haphazard and its manner of col- 
lection wasteful, brutal, and in many cases corrupt.” 

As for Kansu, Dr. Stampar says: 

“The revenues of Kansu have during the last five years 
averaged over eight millions . . . heavier taxation than in 
Chekiang, one of the richest and most heavily taxed prov- 
inces in China. It will be seen also that this revenue, espe- 
cially in Kansu, is not drawn from one or two major sources, 
but from a multitude of taxes each yielding a small sum, 
scarcely any commodity or productive or commercial activ- 
ity going untaxed. The amount which the population pays is 
even higher than is shown by the published figures. In the 
first place, the tax-collectors are able to retain a share — in 
some cases a very large share — of the amounts collected. In 
the second place, to the taxes levied by the provincial or 
hsien governments must be added those imposed by military 
leaders, which in Kansu province are officially estimated at 
more than ten millions.^ 

^ This is a verv conservative estimate, since it includes no mention 
of the chief illegal military taxation in both Kansu and Shensi, which 



DEATH AND TAXES 23 I 

“A further cause of expense to the population is the local 
militia {min-t’nan'\, which, formed originally for defence 
against the bandits, has in many instances degenerated into 
a gang living at the cost of the countryside.” Dr. Stampar 
quotes figures showing that the cost of supporting the 7 nin- 
thian ranges from 30 per cent to 40 per cent of the total local 
government budget — this quite in addition, of course, to the 
burden of maintaining the big regular armies. These latter, 
according to Dr. Stampar, have absorbed over 60 per cent of 
the provincial revenues in both Kansu and Shensi. 

A foreign missionary I met in Shensi told me that he had 
once personally followed a pig from owner to the consumer, 
and in the process saw six different taxes being paid. Another 
missionary, of Kansu, described seeing peasants knock down 
the tyooden walls of their houses (wood being expensive in 
the North-west) and cart it to market to sell in order to pay 
tax-collectors. He said that the attitude of even some of the 
“rich” peasants, while not friendly when the Reds first ar- 
rived, was one of indifference, and a belief that “no Govern- 
ment could be worse than the old.” 

And yet the North-west is by no means a hopeless coun- 
try economically. It is not over-populated; much of its land 
is very rich; it can easily produce far more than it can con- 
sume, and with an improved irrigation system parts of it 
might become a “Chinese Ukraine.” Shensi and Kansu have 
abundant coal deposits. Shensi has a little oil. Dr. Stampar 
thinks that “Shensi, especially the plain in the neighbour- 
hood of Sian, may itself become an industrial centre of an 
importance second only to the Yangtze valley, and needing 
for its service its own coal-fields.” Mineral deposits of Kansu, 

has for many years been the opium revenue. Figures given to me in 
Sianfu indicate that when General Feng Yii-hsiang was in control of 
this region he realized about $80,000,000 a year from this source. This 
income has doubtlessly considerably diminished since then, owing to 
competition from Nanking’s State opium monopoly, but it still brings 
in many millions annually. 




232 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

Chinghai, and Sinkiang, said to be very rich, are scarcely 
touched. In gold alone, says Stampar, “the region may turn 
out to be a second Klondike.” 

Here, surel}% tvere conditions which seemed over-ripe for 
change. Here, surely, were things for men to fight against, 
even if they had nothing to fight jor! And no ymnder, when 
the Red Star appeared in the North-west, thousands of men 
arose to welcome it as a symbol of hope and freedom. 

But did the Reds, after all, prove any better.? 


< 1 *= 

5 

Soviet Society 

cj - 

W HATEVER it may have been in the South, Chinese 
Communism as I found it in the North-west might 
more accurately be called rui'al equalitarianism than any- 
thing Marx would have found acceptable as a model child of 
his otvn. This was manifestly true economically, and al- 
though in the social, political, and cultural life of the organ- 
ized Soviets there was a crude Marxist guidance, limitations 
of material conditions were everywhere obvious. 

It has already been emphasized that there is no machine 
industry of any importance in the North-v^’est. The region 
is far less influenced by industrialism than the eastern parts 
of Ch.ina; .it is farming and grazing country primarily, the 
culture of which has been for centuries in stagnation, though 
many of the economic abuses prevalent no doubt reflect the 
changing economy in the semi-industfialized cities. Yet the 
Red Army itself was an outstanding product of the impact 



SOVIET SOCIETY 233 

of “industrialization” on China, and the shock of the ideas it 
brought into the fossilized culture here was in a true sense 
revolutionary. 

Objective conditions, however, denied the Reds the pos- 
sibility of organizing much more than the political frame- 
work for the beginnings of a modern economy, of which 
naturally they could think only in terms of a future which 
might give them power in the great cities, where they could 
take over the industrial bases from the foreign concessions 
and thus lay the foundations for a true Socialist society. 
Meanwhile, in the rural areas, their activity centred chiefly 
on the solution of the immediate problems of the peasants — 
land and taxes. This may sound like the reactionar)’’ pro- 
gramme of the old Narodniks of Russia, but the great differ- 
ence lies in the fact that Chinese Communists never regarded 
land distribution as anything more than a phase in the build- 
ing of a mass base, a stage enabling them to develop the revo- 
lutionary struggle towards the conquest of power and the 
ultimate realization of thoroughgoing Socialist changes. In 
Fundamental Laws of the Chinese Soviet Republic^ the First 
All-China Soviet Congress in 1931 set forth in detail the 
“maximum programme” of the Communist Party of China 
— and reference to it shows clearly that the ultimate aim of 
Chinese Communists is a true and complete Socialist State of 
the Marx-Leninist conception. Meanwhile, however, it has 
,to be remembered that the social, political, and economic or- 
ganization of the Red districts has all along been only a veiy 
provisional affair. Even in Kiangsi it was little more than 
that. Because the Soviets had to fight for an existence from 
-their beginning, their main task was always to build a mili- 
tary and political base for the extension of the revolution on 
a wider and deeper scale, rather than to “try out Commu- 
nism in China,” which is what some people thought the Reds 
were attempting in their little blockaded areas. 

^ Martin Lawrence, London, op. cit. 



2 34 the north-west 

The immediate basis of support for the Reds in the 
North-west was obviously not so much the idea of “from 
each according to his ability, to each according to his need” 
as it was something like the promise of Dr. Sun Yat-sen: 
“Land to those who till it.” Among economic reforrris which 
the Reds could claim to their credit these four evidently 
counted most to the peasantry: redistribution of land, aboli- 
tion of usury, abolition of tax-extortion, and elimination of 
privileged groups. 

While theoretically the Soviets were a “workers’ and 
peasants’ ” Government, in actual practice the whole con- 
stituency was overwhelmingly peasant in character and oc- 
cupation, and the regime had to shape itself accordingly. An 
attempt was made to balance peasant influence, and offset it, 
by classifying the rural population into these categories: 
great landlords, middle and small landlords, rich peasants, 
middle peasants, poor peasants, tenant peasants, rural -work- 
ers, handicraft workers, lumpen proletariat, and a division 
called tzu-yo chih-yeb chieh, or professional workers — 
which included teachers, doctors, and technicians, the “rural 
intelligentsia.” These divisions were political as well as eco- 
nomic, and in the election of the Soviets the tenant peasants, 
rural workers, handicraft workers, and so on, were given a 
very much greater representation than the other categories 
— the aim apparently being to create some kind of demo- 
cratic dictatorship of the “rural proletariat.” However, it 
was hard to see that there was any important basic class divi- 
sion operative in these categories, landlords excepted, as they 
were all directly attached to agrarian economy. 

Within these limitations the Soviets seemed to work very 
well in areas where the regime was stabilized. The structure 
of representative government was built up from the village 
Soviet, as the smallest unit: above it were the district Soviet, 
the, county Soviet, and the provincial and, central Soviets. 
Each village elected its delegates to the higher Soviets clear 



SOVIET SOCIETY 


235 

up to the delegates elected for the Soviet Congress. Suffrage 
was universal over the age of sixteen, but it was not equal, 
for reasons mentioned above. 

Various committees were established under each of the 
district Soviets. An all-powerful committee, usually elected 
in a mass meeting shortly after the occupation of a district 
by the Red Army, and preceded by an intensified propa- 
ganda campaign, was the revolutionary committee. It called 
for elections or re-elections, and closely co-operated with 
the Communist Party. Under the district Soviet, and ap- 
pointed by it, were committees for education, co-operatives, 
military training, political training, land, public health, par- 
tisan training, revolutionary'^ defence, enlargement of the 
Red Army, agrarian mutual aid, Red Army land-tilling, and 
others. Such committees were found in every branch organ 
of the Soviets, right up to the Central Government, where 
policies were co-ordinated and State decisions made. 

Organization did not stop with the Government itself. 
The Communist Party had an extensive membership among 
farmers and workers, in the towns and in the villages. In ad- 
dition there were the Young Communists, and under them 
two organizations which embraced in their membership 
most of the youth. These were called the Shao-Nien Hsien- 
Feng Tui and the Erh-T’ung T’uan — the Young Vanguards 
and the Children’s Brigades. The Communist Party organ- 
ized the women also into Young Communist Leagues, anti- 
Japanese societies, nursing schools, weaving schools, and till- 
ing brigades. Adult farmers were organized into the P’in- 
Min Hui, or Poor People’s Society, and into anti- Japanese 
societies. Even the Elder Brother Society, an ancient secret 
organization, was brought into Soviet life and given open 
and legal work to do. The Nung-min Tui, or Peasant 
Guards, and the Yu Chi Tui, or Partisan (Roving) Brigades, 
were also part of the intensely organized rural political and 
social structure. 



IN THE NORTH-WEST 


236 

The work of all these organizations and their various 
commitees was co-ordinated by the Central Soviet Govern- 
ment, the Communist Party, and the Red Army. Here I shall 
not enter into statistical detail, or tiresome tables and charts, 
to explain the organic connections of these groups, but it can 
be said in general that they were all skilfully interwoven, 
and each directly under the guidance of some Communist, 
though decisions of organization, membership, and work 
seemed to be carried out in a democratic way by the peas- 
ants themselves. The aim of Soviet organization obviously 
was to make every man, woman, or child a member of some- 
thing, with definite work assigned to him to perform. 

Rather typical of the intensity of Soviet efforts were the 
methods used to increase production and utilize great areas 
of wasteland. I have copies of many orders, quite astonishing 
in their scope and common-sense practicality, issued by the 
land commission to its various branches to guide them in or- 
ganizing and propagandizing the peasants in the tasks of cul- 
tivation. To illustrate: in one of these orders that I picked 
up in a branch land office, instructions were given concern- 
ing spring cultivation, the commission urging its workers to 
“make widespread propaganda to induce the masses to par- 
ticipate voluntarily, without involving any form of compul- 
sory command.” Detailed advice was offered on how to 
achieve the four main demands of this planting period, 
which the previous winter had been recognized by the So- 
viets to be: more extensive utilization of wasteland, and ex- 
pansion of Red Army land; increased crop yields; greater 
diversity of crops, with special emphasis on new varieties of 
melons and vegetables; and expansion of cotton acreage. 

Among the devices recommended by this order’^ to ex- 
pand labour power, and especially to bring women directly 
into agricultural production (particularly in districts where 

^ Order of Instruction, Land Commission, January 28, 1936 
(At'ayapao). 



SOVIET SOCIETY 237 

the male population had declined as a result of enlistments 
in the Red Army), the following amusing and ingenious in- 
struction suggests the efficiency with which the Reds went 
about utilizing their available materials: 

“To mobilize women, boys, and old men to participate 
in spring planting and cultivation, each according to his abil- 
ity to carry on either a principal or an auxiliary task in the 
labour processes of production. For example, ‘large feet’ 
(natural feet) and young women should be mobilized to or- 
ganize production-teaching corps, with tasks varying from 
land-clearance up to the main tasks of agricultural produc- 
tion itself. Small feet (bound feet), young boys, and old men 
must be mobilized to help in weed-pulling, collecting dung, 
and for other auxiliary tasks.” 

But how did the peasants feel about this? The Chinese 
peasant is supposed to hate organization, discipline, and any 
social activity beyond his own family. Well, the Reds simply 
laugh at you when you tell them that. They say that no 
Chinese peasant dislikes organization or social activity if he 
is Avorkino- for himself and not the min-fuan — the landlord 
or the tax-collector. And I must admit that most of the peas- 
ants to whom I talked seemed to support Soviets and the 
Red Army. Many of them were very free in their criticisms 
and complaints, but, when asked whether they preferred it 
to the old days, the answer Avas nearly ahvays an emphatic 
yes. I noticed also that most of them talked about the SoAuets 
as 'woinenti chengju — “our government” — and this struck 
me as something neAV in rural China. 

One thing Avhich suggested that the Reds have their base 
in the mass of the population Avas that in all the older SoAuet 
districts the policing and guarding Avas done almost entirely 
by the peasant organizations alone. There Avere feAV actual 
Red Army garrisons in the SoAuet districts, all the fighting 
strength of the army being kept at the front. Local defence , 
Avas shared by the village revolutionary defence corps, peas- 



238 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

ant guards, and partisans. This fact may explain some of the 
popularity of the Red Army with the peasantry, for it was 
rarely planted down on them as an instrument of oppression 
and exploitation, like other armies, but was generally at the 
front, fighting for its food there, and engaged in meeting 
enemy attacks. On the other hand, the intensive organization 
of the peasantry created a rear-guard and base which freed 
the Red Army to operate with the extreme mobility for 
which it has been noted. 

' But really to understand the peasant support for the 
Communist movement it is necessary to keep in mind its eco- 
nomic basis. I have already described the burden borne by 
the peasantry in the North-west under the former regime. 
Now, wherever the Reds went there is no doubt they radi- 
cally changed the situation for the tenant farmer, the poor 
farmer, the middle farmer, and all the “have-not” elements. 
All forms of taxation were abolished in the new districts for 
the first year, to give the farmers a breathing-space, and in 
the old districts only a progressive single tax on land was 
collected, and a small single tax (from 5 to 10 per cent) on 
business. Secondly, they gave land to the land-hungry peas- 
ants, and began the reclamation of great areas of ‘Svasteland” 
— mostly the land of absentee or fleeing landlords. Thirdly, 
they took land and livestock from the wealthy classes and 
redistributed among the poor. 

Redistribution of land was a fundamental of Red policy. 
How was it carried out? Later on, for reasons of national 
political manoeuvre, there was to be a drastic retreat in the 
Soviet land polic)'-, but when I travelled in the North-west 
the land laws in force (promulgated by the North-west So- 
viet Government in December, 1935) provided for the con- 
fiscation of all landlords’ land and the confiscation of all land 
of rich peasants that was not cultivated by the owners them- 
selves. However, both the landlord and the rich peasant were 
allowed as much land as they could till with their own la- 



SOVIET SOCIETY 


239 

hour. In districts where there was no land scarcity — and 
there were many such districts in the North-west — the lands 
of resident landlords and rich peasants were in practice not 
confiscated at all, but the wasteland and land of absentee 
owners was distributed, and sometimes there was a re-divi- 
sion of best quality land, poor peasants being given better 
soil, and landlords being allotted the same amount of poorer 
land. 


What was a landlord? According to the Communists’ 
definition (greatly simplified), any farmer who collected the 
greater part of his income from land rented out to others, 
and not from his own labour, was a landlord. By this defini- 
tion the usurers and t'u-hao^ were put in about the same 
category as landlords, and similarly treated. Usury rates, ac- 
cording to Dr. Stampar, formerly ranged as high as 60 per 
cent in the North-west, or very much higher in times of 
stress. Although land is very cheap in many parts of Kansu, 
Shensi, and Ninghsia, it is practically impossible for a farm 
worker or tenant with no capital to accumulate enough to 
buy sufficient land for his family. I met farmers in the Red 
districts who formerly had never been able to own any land, 
although rates in some places were as low as two or three 


dollars an acre. 


Classes other than those mentioned above were not sub- 


ject to confiscatory action, so a big percentage of the farm- 
ers stood to benefit immediately by the redistribution. The 
poorest, farmers, tenants, and farm labourers were all pro- 
vided with land enough for a livelihood. There did not seem 
to be an attempt to “equalize” land-ownership. The primary 
purpose of the Soviet land law?, as explained to me by Wang 
Kuan-lan (the twenty-nine-year-old Russian-returned stu- 
dent who was land commissioner for the tlrree Red prov- 


^ T’li-hao, which actually means “local rascals,” is the Reds’ term 
for landowners who also derive a big part of their income from 
lending money and buying mortgages. 



240 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

inces of the North-west), was to provide for every person 
sufficient land to guarantee him and his family a decent live- 
lihood — which was claimed to be the most urgent demand 
of the peasantry. 

Tlie land problem — confiscation and redistribution — W2.s 
greatly simplified in the North-west by the fact that big 
estates were formerly owned by officials, tax-collectors, and 
absentee landlords. With the confiscation of these, in many 
cases the immediate demands of the poor peasantry were 
satisfied, without much interference with either the resident 
small landlords or the rich peasants. Thus the Reds not only 
created the economic base for support in the poor and land- 
less peasantry by giving them farms, but in some cases won 
the gratitude of middle peasants by abolishing tax-exploita- 
tion, and in a few instances enlisted the aid of small landlords 
on the same basis or on the patriotic appeals of the anti- 
Japanese movement. There were several prominent Shensi 
Communists from landlord families. 

Additional help was given to the poor farmers in the 
form of loans at very low rates of interest or no interest at 
all. Usury was entirely abolished, but private lending, at 
rates fixed at a maximum of lo per cent annually, was per- 
mitted. The ordinary Government lending rate was 5 per 
cent. Several thousand agricultural implements made in the 
Red arsenals, and thousands of pounds of seed-grain, were 
supplied to landless peasants breaking wasteland. A primitive 
agricultural school had been established, and I was told it 
was planned to open an animal-husbandry school as soon as 
an expert in this field, expected from Shanghai, had arrived. 

The co-operative movement was being vigorously 
pushed. These activities extended beyond production and 
distribution co-operatives, branching out to include co- 
operation in such (for China) novel forms as the collective 
use of farm animals and implements — especially in tilling 
public lands and Red Army lands — and in the organization 



SOVIET SOCIETY 24! 

of labour mutual-aid societies. By the latter devdce great 
areas could be quickly planted and harvested collectively, 
and periods of idleness by individual farmers eliminated. The 
Reds saw to it that a man earned his new land! In busy pe- 
riods the system of “Saturday Brigades” was used, when not 
only all the children’s organizations, but everj^ Soviet offi- 
cial, Red partisan. Red guard, women’s organization, and 
any Red Army detachment that happened to be nearbyi 
were mobilized to work at least one day a week at farming 
tasks. Even Mao Tse-tung took part in this work. 

Here the Reds were introducing the germs of the dras- 
tically revolutionary idea of collective effort — and doing 
primary education work for some future period when col- 
lectivization might become practicable. At the same time, 
into the dark recesses of peasant mentality there was slowly 
penetrating the concept of a broader realm of social life. For 
the organizations created among the peasantry were what 
the Reds called three-in-one: economic, political, and cul- 
tural in their utility. 

What cultural progress the Reds had made among these 
people was, by any advanced Western standards, negligible 
indeed. But certain outstanding evils common in most parts 
of China had definitely been eliminated in the score of long- 
Sovietized counties in north Shensi, and a crusade of propa- 
ganda was being conducted among inhabitants of newer 
areas to spread the same elementary reforms there. As an 
outstanding achievement, opium had been completely elimi- 
nated in north Shensi, and in fact I did not see any sign of 
poppies after I entered the Soviet districts. Official corrup- 
tion was almost unheard-of. Beggary and unemployment 
did seem to have been, as the Reds claimed, “liquidated.” I 
did not see a beggar during all my travels in the Red areas. 
Foot-bindingr and infanticide were criminal offences, child 
slavery and prostitution had disappeared, and polyandt)’^ and 
polygamy were prohibited. 



242 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

The myths of “communized wives” or “nationalization 
of women” are too patently absurd to be denied, but changes 
in marriage, divorce, and inheritance were in themselves ex- 
tremely radical against the background of semi-feudal law 
and practice elsewhere in China. Marriage regulations^ in- 
cluded interesting provisions against mother-in-law tyranny, 
the buying and selling of women as wives and concubines, 
and the custom of “arranged matches.” Marriage was by 
mutual consent, the legal age had been moved up sharply to 
twenty for men and eighteen for women; dowries were pro- 
hibited, and any couple registering as man and wife before 
a county, municipal, or village Soviet was given a marriage 
certificate without cost. Men and women actually co-habit- 
ing were considered legally married, whether registered or 
not — which seems to rule out “free love” — and their off- 
spring were legitimate. No illegitimacy of children was 
recognized. 

Divorce could also be secured from the registration bu- 
reau of the Soviet, free of charge, on* the “insistent demand” 
of either party to the marriage contract, but wives of Red 
Army men were required to have their husbands’ consent 
before a divorce was granted. Property was divided equally 
between the divorcees, and both were legally obliged to care 
for their children, but responsibility for debts was shoul- 
dered by the man alone (!), who Avas also obliged to supply 
two-thirds of the children’s living expenses. 

Education, in theory, Avas “free and universal,” but par- 
ents had of course to supply their children with food and 
clothing. In practice, nothing like “free and unwersal” edu- 
cation had yet been achicA’^ed, although old Hsu Teh-lih, the 
commissioner of education, boasted to me that if they Avere 
given a feAV years of peace in the North-Avest they AAmuld 
astound the rest of China Avith the educational progress they 

^ The Marriage Law of the Chinese Soviet Republic (Reprinted) 
(Pao An, July, 1936). 



ANATOMY OF MONEY 243 

would make. Farther on I shall discuss more in detail what 
the Communists had done and hoped to do to liquidate the 
appalling illiteracy of this region, but first it is interesting to 
know how the Government was financing not only the edu- 
cational programme, such as it was, but this whole seemingly 
simple and yet in its way vastly complex organism which I 
have called Soviet society. 


4 

4 

Anatomy of Money 

< 1 = 

I T WAS imperative for Soviet economy to fulfil at least 
two elementary functions: to feed and equip the Red 
Army, and to bring immediate relief to the poor peasantry. 
Failing in either, the Soviet base would soon collapse. To 
guarantee success at these tasks it was necessary for the Reds, 
even from earliest days, to begin some kind of economic 
construction. 

Soviet economy in the North-west was a curious mixture 
of private capitalism. State capitalism, and primitive Social- 
ism. Private enterprise and industry were permitted and en- 
couraged, and private transaction in the land and its products 
was allowed, with restrictions. At the same time the State 
owned and exploited enterprises such as oil-wells, salt-wells, 
and coal-mines, and it traded in cattle, hides, salt, wool, cot- 
ton, paper, and other raw materials. But it did not establish 
a monopoly in these articles, and in all of them private en- 
terprises could, and to some extent did, compete. 



244 NORTH-WEST 

A third kind of economy was created by the establish- 
ment of co-operatives, in which the Government and the 
masses participated as partners, competing not only with 
private capitalism, but also with State capitalism! But re- 
member that it was all conducted on a very small and primi- 
tive scale. Thus, although the fundamental antagonisms in 
such an arrangement were obvious, and in an economically 
more highly developed area would have been ruinous, here 
in the Red regions they somehow supplemented each other. 

Cleai'ly the tendency of the Soviet co-operative move- 
ment was Socialistic. The Reds defined the co-operative “as 
an instrument to resist private capitalism and develop a new 
economic system,” and they listed its five main functions as 
follows; “to combat the exploitation of the masses by the 
merchants; to combat the enemy’s blockade; to develop the 
national economy of the Soviet districts; to raise the eco- 
nomic-political level of the masses; and to prepare the con- 
ditions for Socialist construction” — a period in which “the 
democratic revolution of the Chinese bourgeoisie, under the 
leadership of the proletariat, may create energetic conditions 
enabling the transition of this revolution into Socialism.”^ 

The first two of those high-sounding functions, as a mat- 
ter of fact, meant simply that the co-operative could help 
the masses organize their own blockade-running corps, as 
auxiliaries to the blockade-running activity of the Govern- 
ment. Trade between Red and White districts was prohib- 
ited by Nanking, but by using small mountain roads, and by 
oiling the palms of border guards, the Reds at times man- 
aged to carry on a fairly lively export business. Taking out 
raw materials from the Soviet districts, the transport corps 
in the service of the State Trade Bureau, or the co-opera- 
tives, exchanged them for Kuomintang money and needed 
manufactures. 

^ Outline for Co-operative Development, Department of National 
Economy (November, 1935, Wayapao, Shensi), p. 4. 



ANATOMY OF MONEY 245 

Consumption, sales, production, and credit co-operatives 
were organized in the village, district, county, and province. 
Above them was a central bureau of co-operatives, under 
the finance commissioner and a department of national econ- 
omy. These co-operatives were really constructed to en- 
courage the participation of the lowest strata of society. 
Shares entitling the purchaser to membership were priced as 
low as fifty cents, or even twenty cents, and organizational 
duties were so extensive as to bring nearly every shareholder 
into the economic or political life of the co-operative. While 
there was no restriction on the number of shares an indi- 
vidual member could buy, each member was entitled to but 
one vote, regardless of how many shares he held. Co-opera- 
tives elected their own managing committees and supervi- 
sory committees, with the assistance of the central bureau, 
which also furnished trained workers and organizers. Each 
co-operative had departments for business, propaganda, or- 
ganization, survey, and statistics. 

Various prizes Y'ere offered for efficient management, 
and widespread propaganda stimulated and educated the 
peasants concerning the usefulness of the movement. Finan- 
cial as well as technical help was furnished by the Govern- 
ment, which participated in the enterprises on a profit-shar- 
ing basis, like the members. Some §70,000 in non-interest- 
bearing loans had been invested by the Government in the 
co-operatives of Shensi and Kansu. 

Only Soviet paper was in use, except in the border coun- 
ties, where White paper was also accepted. In their Soviets 
in KJangsi, Anhui, and Szechuan the Reds minted silver dol- 
lars, and subsidiary coins in copper, and some also in silver, 
and much of this metal was transported to the North-west. 
But after the decree of November, 1935, when Nanking be- 
gan the confiscation of ail silver in China, and its price 
soared, the Reds Muthdrew their silver, and held it as reserve 
for their note issue. Todav thev have one of the few caches 



246 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

of silver in the country not yet in the hands of the Kuo- 
mintang. 

Paper currency in the South, bearing the signature of the 
“Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Soviet Government State 
Bank,” was excellently printed, on good bank paper. In the 
North-west, technical deficiencies resulted in a much cruder ■ 
issue on poor paper, and sometimes on cloth. Their slogans 
appeared on ail money. Notes issued in Shensi bore such ex- 
hortations as these: “Stop civil war!” “Unite to resist Ja- 
pan!” “Long live the Chinese revolution!” 

Soviet money was accepted nearly everywhere in the 
stablilized Soviets, and had full buying power, prices being 
generally slightly lower than in the White districts. What 
held it up? I did not know what reserve the Reds had on 
their notes, nor what the latter totalled, but obviously it was 
no promise of redemption that made the peasants use it. 
Compulsory acceptance may have been enforced in some 
places; personally I saw no instances of it. On the borders 
the peasants often refused Soviet money, but the Reds paid 
them in Kuomintang paper, with which the army was sup- 
plied. Elsewhere, however, Soviet currency seemed to get its 
status on the basis of popular confidence in the Government, 
and the fact that it had some real purchasing value in the 
market. Of course, that is about all that holds up the Kuo- 
mintang dollar also. 

But how could merchants sell articles imported from the 
White regions for currency M'^hich had no exchange value 
outside the. Soviet districts? This difficulty was met by the 
State treasury, ^diich had fixed an exchange rate of Soviet 
S1.21 to Kuomintang §1. Regulations provided that “all 
goods imported from the White districts, and sold directly 
to the State Trade Bureau, will be paid for in foreign (Kuo- 
mintang) currency; imports of necessities, when not sold 
directly to the State Trade Bureau, but through co-opera- ' 
tives or by private merchants, shall first be registered with 



ANATOMY OF MONEY 247 

the State Trade Bureau, and proceeds of their sale for Soviet 
currency may be exchanged for White paper; other ex- 
, change will be given when its necessity is established.’”^ In 
practice this of course meant that all “foreign” imports had 
to be paid for in “foreign” exchange. But as the value of im- 
ported manufactures (meagre enough) greatly exceeded the 
value of Soviet exports (which were chiefly raw materials, 
and were all sold in a depressed market as smuggled goods), 
there v^as always a tendency towards a heavy unfavourable 
balance of payments. In other words, bankruptcy. How was 
it overcome? 

It was not, entirely. But as far as I could discover the 
problem was met principally by the ingenuity of Lin Pai- 
chu, the dignified white-haired Commissioner of Finance, 
whose task was to make Red ends meet. This interesting old 
custodian of the exchequer had once been treasurer of the 
Kuomintang, and behind him lay an amazing storj'', which I 
can only outline here. 

Son of a Hunanese school-teacher, Lin Pai-chu was born 
in 1882, educated in the Classics, attended normal college at 
Changtchfu, and later studied in Tokyo. While in Japan he 
met Sun Yat-sen, then exiled from China by the Alanchus, 
and joined his secret revolutionary society, the T’ung Aleng 
Hui. When Sun merged his T’ung Aleng Hui with other 
revolutionary groups to found the Kuomintang, Lin Pai-chu 
became a charter member. Later on he met Ch’cn Tu-hsiu, 
was much influenced by him, and in 1922 joined the Com- 
munist Party. He continued to work closely with Dr. Sun 
Yat-sen, however, who admitted Communists to his part^^ 
and Lin was in turn treasurer and chairman of the General 
Affairs Department of the Kuomintang. He was v/ith Sun 
Yat-sen when he died. 

At the beginning of the Nationalist Revolution, Lin Pai- 

^ “Concerning Soviet Monctarj' Policy,” Tangti Krai^tso (Fcirty 
Work), No. 12 (Pao An, 1936’;. 



248 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

chu was one of the several elders in the Central Executive 
Committee of the Kuomintang who had precedence over 
Chiang Kai-shek. In Canton he was chairman of the Peasant 
Ministry and during the Northern Expedition he became 
political commissar of the Sixth Army, commanded by Gen- 
eral Ch’eng Ch’ien — the late chief-of-staff at Nanking. 
M'lien Chiancr Kai-shek began the extermination of the Com- 
munists in 1927, Lin denounced him, fled to Hongkong, and 
then to Soviet Russia, where he studied for four years in the 
Communist Academy. On his return to China he took pas- 
sage on the “underground railway” and safely reached 
Kiangsi. There he was appointed Commissioner of Finance. 
Now a widower, Lin has not seen his grown-up daughter 
and son since 1927. At the age of forty-five he abandoned 
the comfortable assets of his position and staked his destiny 
u'ith the young Communists. 

Into my room in the Foreign Office one morning came 
this fifty-fivg-year-old veteran of the Long March, wearing 
a cheerful smile, a faded uniform, a red-starred cap with a 
broken peak, and in front of his kindly eyes a pair of spec- 
tacles one side of which was trussed up over his ear with a 
piece of string. The Commissioner of Finance! He sat down 
on the edge of the k’cvig and we began to talk about sources 
of revenue. The Government, I understood, collected prac- 
tically no taxes-, its industrial income must be negligible; 
then where, I wanted to know, did it get its money? 

Lin began to explain: “We say we do not tax the masses, 
and this is true. But we do heavily tax the exploiting classes, 
confiscating their surplus cash and goods. Thus, all our taxa- 
tion is direct. This is just the opposite of the Kuomintang 
practice, under which ultimately the workers and the poor 
peasants have to carry most of the tax burden. Here w'e tax 
less than lo per cent of the population — the landlords and 
usurers. We also levy a small tax on a few big merchants, but 
none on small merchants. Later on we may impose a small 



ANATOMY OF MONEY 


249 

progressive tax on the peasantry, but at the present moment 
all mass taxes have been completely abolished. 

“Another source of income is from voluntary contribu- 
tions of the people. Revolutionary patriotic feeling runs very 
high where war is on, and the people realize that they may 
lose their Soviets. They make big voluntary contributions of 
food, money, and clothing to the Red Army. We derive 
some income also from State trade, from Red Army lands, 
from our own industries, from the co-operatives, and from 
bank loans. But of course our biggest revenue is from con- 
fiscations.” 

“By confiscation,” I interrupted, “you mean what is 
commonly described as loot?” 

Lin laughed shortly. “The Kuomintang calls it loot. 
Well, if taxation of the exploiters of the masses is loot, so is 
the Kuomintang’s taxation of the masses. But the Red Army 
does no looting in the sense that White armies loot. Confis- 
cations are made only by authorized persons, under the di- 
rection of the Finance Commission. Every item must be re- 
ported by inventory to the Government, and is utilized only 
for the general benefit of society. Private looting is heavily 
punished. Just ask the people if Red soldiers take anything 
without paying for it.” 

“Well, you are quite right. The answer to that naturally 
would depend on whether you asked a landlord or a peas- 
ant.” 

“If we did not have to conduct incessant war,” Lin con- 
tinued, “we could easily build a self-supporting economy 
here. Our budget is carefully made, and every possible econ- 
omy is practised. Because every Soviet official is also a patriot 
and a revolutionary, we demand no \vages, and we can exist 
on but little food. It will probably surprise you to know 
how small our budget is. For this whole arca^ our present 
e.xpcnditurc is only about $320,000 per month. This repre- 
^ Then about the size of Austria. 



250 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

sents goods value as well as money value. Of this sum, from 
40 to 50 per cent comes from confiscations, and 15 or 20 per 
cent comes from voluntary contributions, including cash 
raised by the Party among our supporters in the White dis- 
tricts. The rest of our revenue is derived from trade, eco- 
nomic construction. Red Army lands, and bank loans to the 
Government.” 

The Reds claimed to have devised a squeeze-proof ma- 
chinery of budgeting, of receipts and disbursements. I have 
read part of Lin Pai-chu’s Outline for Budget Compilation, 
which gives a detailed description of the system and all its 
safeguards. Its integrity seemed to be based primarily on 
collective control of receipts and disbursements. From the 
highest organ down to the village, the treasurer was ac- 
countable, both for payments and collections, to a supervis- 
ing committee, so that juggling of figures for individual 
profit was extremely difficult. Commissioner Lin was very 
proud of his system, and asserted that under it any kind of 
squeeze was effectively impossible. It may have been true. 
Anyway, it was obvious that in the Red districts the real 
problem as yet was not one of squeeze, in the traditional 
sense, but of squeezing through! Despite Lin’s cheerful op- 
timism, this is what I wrote in my diary after that interview: 

“Whatever Lin’s figures may mean exactly, it is simply 
a Chinese miracle, when one remembers that partisans have 
been fighting back and forth across this territory for five 
years, that the economy maintains itself at all, that there is 
no famine, and that the peasants on the whole seem to accept 
Soviet currency with faith in it. In fact this cannot be ex- 
plained in terms of finance alone, but is only understandable 
on a social and political basis. 

“Nevertheless, it is perfectly clear that the situation is 
extremely grave, even for an organization that exists on such 
shoe-strings as the Reds feed upon, and one of three changes 
must shortly occur in Soviet economy: ( i ) some form of 



LIFE BEGINS AT FIFTY! Z5I 

machine industrialization, to supply the market with needed 
manufactures; (2) the establishment of a good connection 
with some modern economic base in the outside world, or 
the capture of some economic base on a higher level than the 
present one (Sian or Lanchow, for example); or (3) the 
actual coalescence of such a base, now under White control, 
with the Red districts.” 

The Reds agreed, but did not share my pessimism. “A way 
out was sure to be found.” And in a few months it was! The 
“way out” appeared in the form of an “actual coalescence.” 

Lin Pai-chu didn’t seem to be “getting ahead” financiallv 
very fast himself, by the way. His “allowance” as Commis- 
sioner of Finance was five dollars a month — Red money. 


< 

5 

Life Begins at Fifty! 

4 

I CALL him “Old Hsu” because that is what everj'one in 
the Soviet districts called him — Lao Hsii, the Educator — ■ 
for, although sixty-one is only just an average age for most 
high Government officials elsewhere in the Orient, in Red 
China he seemed a sort of hoar}’ grandfather by contrast 
with others. Yet he was no specimen of decrepitude. Like 
his sexagenarian crony, Hsieh Chiieh-tsai (and you could 
often see this pair of white-haired bandits walking along 
arm-in-arm like middle-school lads), he had an erect and 
vigorous step, bright and merr}’- eyes, and a pair of muscular 



252 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

legs that had carried him across the greatest rivers and moun- 
tain ranges of China on the Long March. 

Hsu Teh-lih was a highly respected professor until at 
the age of fifty he amazingly gave up his home, four chil- 
dren, and the presidency of a normal school in Changsha, to 
stake his future with the Communists. Born in 1876 near 
Changsha, not far from P’eng Teh-huai’s birthplace, he was 
the fourth son in a poor peasant family. By various sacrifices 
his parents gave him six years of classical schooling, at the 
end of which he became a school-teacher under the Manchu 
regime. There he remained till he was twenty-nine, when he 
entered the Changsha Normal College, graduated, and be- 
came an instructor in mathematics. 

Mao Tse-tung was one of his students in the normal col- 
lege (Hsu says he was terrible in math! ), and so were many 
vouths who later became Reds. Hsu himself had a role in 
politics long before Mao knew a republican from a mon- 
archist. He still bears that mark of combat from feudal poli- 
tics in days of the empire, when he cut off the tip of his 
little finger to demonstrate his sincerity in begging by peti- 
tion that a parliament be granted the people. After the first 
revolution, when for a while Hunan had a provincial parlia- 
ment, Old Hsu was a member of it. 

He accompanied the Hunanese delegation of “worker- 
students” to France after the war, and he studied a year at 
Lyons, where he paid his way by odd-time work in a metal 
factory. Later he was a student for three years in Paris Uni- 
versity, earning his tuition then by tutoring Chinese students 
in mathematics. Returning to Hunan in 1923, he established 
two modern normal schools in the capital, and for four years 
enjoyed some prosperity. Not till 1927 did he become a 
Communist and an outcast from bourgeois society. 

During the Nationalist Revolution, Hsu Teh-lih was ac- 
tive in the provincial Kuomintang, but he sympathized with 
the Communists. He openly preached Marxism to his stu- 



LIFE BEGINS AT FIFTY! ZjJ 

dents. When the “purgation” period began he was a marked 
rhan; he had to do the disappearing act, and, having no con- 
nection with the Communist Party, he had to find a haven, 
on his own. “I wanted to be a Communist,” he told me 
rather wistfully, “but nobody ever asked me to join. I was 
already fifty, and I concluded that the Communists con- 
sidered me too old.” But one day a Communist sought out 
Hsu in his hiding-place and asked him to enter the Party. 
He was overjoyed, the old rascal, and he told me he wept 
then to think that he was still of some use in building a new 
world. 

The Party sent him to Russia, where he studied for nvo 
years. On his return he ran the blockade to Kiangsi; soon 
afterwards he became Assistant Commissioner of Education, 
under Ch’ii Ch’iu-pai, and, after Ch’ii was killed, the Execu- 
tive Committee appointed Hsu in his place. Since then he 
has been Lao Hsu, the Educator. And surely his varied ex- 
perience — life and teaching under monarchist, capitalist, and 
Communist forms of society! — ^would seem to qualify him 
for the tasks that faced him. He certainly needed all that 
experience, and more, for those tasks were so great that any 
Western educator would stagger at the scene in despair. But 
Old FIsu was too young to be discouraged. 

One day when we were talking he began humorously to 
enumerate some of his difficulties. “As nearly as we can esti- 
mate,” he asserted, “virtually nobody but a few landlords, 
officials, and merchants could read in the North-west before 
we arrived. The illiteracy seemed to be about 95 per cent. 
This is culturally one of the darkest places on earth. Do you 
know the people in north Shensi and Kansu believe that 
water is harmful to them? The average man here has a bath 
all over only twice in his life — once when he is born, the 
second time when he is married! They hate to wash their 
feet, hands, or faces, or cut their nails or their hair. There are 
more pigtails in this part of China than anywhere else. 



254 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

“But all this and many other prejudices are due to igno- 
rance, and it’s my job to change their mentality. Such a pop- 
ulation, compared with Kiangsi, is very backward indeed. 
There the illiteracy was about 90 per cent, but the cultural 
level was very much higher, we had better material condi- 
tions to work in, and many more trained teachers. In our 
model hsien, Hsing Kuo, we had over three hundred primary 
schools and about eight hundred school-teachers — ^which is 
as many as we have of both in all the Red districts here. 
When we finally withdrew from Hsing Kuo, illiteracy had 
been reduced to less than 20 per cent of the population! 

“Here the work is very much slower. We have to start / 
everything from the beginning. Our material resources are 
very limited. Even our printing machinery has been de- 
stroyed, and now we have to print everything by mimeo- 
graph and stone-block lithograph. The blockade prevents 
us from importing enough paper. We have begun to make 
paper of our own, but the quality is terrible. But never mind 
these difficulties. We have already been able to accomplish 
something. If we are given time we can do things here 
that will astonish the rest of China. We are training scores of 
teachers from the masses now, and the Party is training 
others. Many of them will become voluntary teachers for 
the mass-educational schools. Our results show that the peas- 
ants here are eager to learn when given the chance. 

“And they are not stupid. They learn very quickly, and 
they change their habits when they are given good reasons 
for doing so. In the older Soviet districts here you won’t see 
any girl children Avith bound feet and you will see many 
young women Avith bobb.ed hair. The men are gradually 
cutting off their queues noAv and a lot of them are learning 
to read and Avrite from the Young Communists and the Van- 
guards.” 

It should be explained that under the emergency Soviet 
educational system there AA^ere three sections: institutional. 



LIFE BEGINS AT FIFTY ! 255 

military, and social. The first was run more or less by the 
Soviets, the second by the Red Army, the third by Commu- 
nist organizations. Emphasis in all of them was primarily 
political — even the littlest children learning their first char- 
acters in the shape of simple revolutionary slogans, and 
then working forward into stories of conflict between the 
Reds and the Kuomintang, landlords and peasants, capitalists 
and workers, and so on, with plenty of heroics about the 
Young Communists and the Red Army, and promises of an 
earthly paradise of the Soviet future. 

Under institutional education the Reds already claimed 
to have established about 200 primary schools, and they had 
one normal school for primary teachers, one agricultural 
school, a textile school, a trade-union school of five grades, 
and a Party school, with some 400 students. Courses in all 
these lasted only about six months. 

Greatest emphasis naturally was on military education, 
and here very much had been achieved in two years, despite 
, all the handicaps of the little beleaguered State. There were 
the Red Army Academy, and the cavalry and infantry 
schools, already described. There was a radio school, and a 
medical school, which was really for training nurses. There 
was an engineering school, M'here the students actually got 
the rudimentary training of apprentices. Like the whole 
Soviet organization itself, everything was very provisional 
and designed primarily as a kind of rear-line activity to 
strengthen the Red Army and provide it with new cadres. 
Many of the teachers were not even middle-school gradu- 
ates. What was interesting was the collective use of what- 
ever knowledge they had. These schools were really Com- 
munist not only in ideology, but in the utilization of every 
scrap of technical experience they could mobilize, to “raise 
the cultural level.” 

Even in social education the Soviet aims were primarily 
political. There was no time or occasion to be teaching farm- 



256 IN THE NORTH-WEST 

ers literature or flower arrangement. The Reds were prac- 
tical people. To the Lenin Clubs, the Young Communist 
Leagues, the Partisans, and the village Soviets they sent sim- 
ple, crudely illustrated Shih-tzu, or “Know Characters,” 
texts, and helped mass organizations form self-study groups 
of their own, with some Communist or literate among them 
as a leader. When the youths, or sometimes even aged peas- 
ants, began droning off the short sentences, they found 
themselves absorbing ideas along with their ideographs. 
Thus, entering one of these little “social education centres” 
in the mountains, you might hear these people catechizing 
themselves aloud: 

“What is this?” 

“This is the Red Flag.” 

“What is this?” 

“This is a poor man.” 

“What is the Red Flag?” 

“The Red Flag is the flag of the Red Army.” 

“What is the Red Army?” 

“The Red Army is the army of the poor men!” 

And so on, right up to the point where, if he knew the 
whole 500 or 600 characters before anyone else, the youth 
could collect the red tassel or pencil or whatever was prom- 
ised. Crude propaganda, of course. But when the farmers 
and farmers’ sons and daughters finished the » book they 
could not only read for the first time in their lives, but they 
krfew who had taught them, and why. Tliey had grasped 
the basic fighting ideas of Chinese Communism. 

And, anyway, I should think it was a lot more amusing 
than teaching people to read via the this-is-a-cat, that-is-a- 
mouse, and the vdiat-is-the-cat-doing, the-cat-is-eating-the- 
mouse method. Why teach realists in allegories? 

In an effort to find a quicker medium for bringing liter- 
acy to the masses the Communists had begun a limited use 
of Latinized Chinese. They had worked out an alphabet of 



LIKE BEGINS AT FIFTY! 257 

twenty-eight letters by which they claimed to be able to 
reproduce nearly all Chinese phonetics, and had written and 
published a little pocket dictionary with the commonest 
phrases of Chinese rendered into polysyllabic, easily readable 
words. Part of the paper Hung Ssu Chung Hua (Red Chma) 
was published in Latin-hua, and Old Hsu was experimenting 
with it on a class of youngsters he had picked up in Pao An. 
He believed that the complicated Chinese characters would 
eventually have to be abandoned in education on a mass 
scale, and he had many arguments in favour of his system, 
on which he had been working for years. 

But so far he wasn’t boasting about results, either with 
his Latin-hua or his other educational efforts. “The cultural 
level was so low here it couldn’t be made worse, so naturally 
we’ve made some progress,” he said. As for the future, he 
only wanted time. Meanwhile he urged me to concentrate 
on studying educational methods in the Red Army, where 
he claimed real revolutionary teaching could be seen. It 
sounded strange. “Learn while you fight” is a novel slogan 
for any army, but in China it strains your credulity. The 
Reds promised me that if I went to the front I could see how 
it was done. And soon afterwards they had actually talked 
me onto a horse and sent me on my way — but not prima- 
rily to study education. 




PART SEVEN; EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

I 


Conversation voith Red Peasants 


O- 


A S I travelled beyond Pao An, towards the Kansu border 
- and the front, I stayed in the rude huts of peasants, 
slept on their mud k'angs (when the luxury of wooden 
doors was not available), ate their food, and enjoyed their 
talk. They were all poor people, kind and hospitable. Some 
of them refused any money from me when they heard I 
was a “foreign guest.” I remember one old bound-footed 
peasant woman, with five or six youngsters to feed, who 
insisted upon killing one of her half-dozen chickens for me. 

“We can’t have a foreign devil telling people in the outer 
world that we Reds don’t know etiquette!” I overheard her 
say to one of my companions. I am sure she did not mean to 
be impolite. She simply knew no other words but “foreign 
devil” to describe the situation. 

I was travelling then svith Fu Chin-kuei, a young Com- 
munist who had been delegated by the Red Foreign Office 
to accompany me to the front. Like all the Reds in the rear, 
Fu was delighted at the prospect of a chance to be with the 
army, and he looked upon me as a godsend. At the same time 
he regarded me frankly as an imperialist, and vietved my 
whole trip with open scepticism. He was unfailingly helpful 
in every way, however, and before the trip was over we 
were to become very good friends. 

259 



z6o EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

One night at Chou Chia, a village of north Shensi near 
the Kansu border, Fu and I found quarters in a compound , 
where five or six peasant families lived. A farmer of about 
forty-five, responsible for six of the fifteen little children 
who scampered back and forth incessantly, agreed to accom- 
modate us, with ready courtesy. He gave us a clean room 
with new felt on the k’ang, and provided our animals with 
corn and straw. He sold us a chicken for twenty cents, and 
some eggs, but for the room would take nothing. He had 
been to Yenan and he had seen foreigners before, but none 
of the other men, women or children had seen one, and they 
all now came round diffidently to have a peek. One of the 
young children burst into frightened tears at the astonish- 
ing sight. 

After dinner a number of the peasants came into our 
room, offered me tobacco, and began to talk. They wanted 
to know what we grew in my country, whether we had corn 
and millet, horses and cows, and whether we used goat-dung 
for fertilizer. (One peasant asked whether we had chickens, 
and at this our host sniffed contemptuously. “Where there 
are men, there must be chickens!” he observed.) Were there 
rich and poor in my country? Was there a Communist Party 
and a Red Army? I’m afraid my explanation of why there 
was a Communist Party but no Red Army quite baffled 
them. ' 

In return for answering their numerous questions, I 
asked a few of my own. What did they think of the Red 
Army? They promptly began to complain about the exces- 
sive eating habits of the cavalry’s horses. It seemed that 
when the Red Army Academy had recently moved its cav- 
alry school it paused in this village for several days, with the 
result that a big depression had been made in the corn and 
straw reserves. 

“Didn’t they pay you for what they bought?” demanded 
Fu Chin-kuei. 



CONVERSATION WITH RED PEASANTS 261 

.“Yes, yes, they paid all right; that isn’t the question. We 
haven’t a great amount, you know, only so many tan of corn 
and millet and straw. We have only enough for ourselves 
and maybe a little more, and we have the winter ahead of 
us. Will the co-operatives sell us grain next January? That’s 
what we tvonder. What can we buy with Soviet money? 
We can’t even buy opium!” 

This came from a ragged old man who still wore a queue 
and looked sourly down his wrinkled nose and along the 
two-foot stem of his bamboo pipe. The younger men 
grinned when he spoke. Fu admitted they couldn’t buy 
opium, but he said the}' could buy in the co-operatives any- 
thing else they needed. 

“Can we now?” demanded our host. “Can we buy a 
bowl like this one, eh?” And he picked up the cheap red 
celluloid bowl (Japanese-made, I suspect) which I had 
brought with me from Sian. Fu confessed the co-operatives 
had no red bonds, but said they had plenty of grain, cloth, 
• paraffin, candles, needles, matches, ■ salt — what did they 
n'ant? 

“I hear you can’t get more than six feet of cloth per man; 
now, isn’t it so?” demanded one farmer. 

Fu wasn’t sure; he thought there was plenty of cloth. He 
resorted to the anti-Japanese argument. “Life is as bitter for 
us as for you,” he said. “The Red Army is fighting for }mu, 
the farmers and workers, to protect you from the Japanese 
and the Kuomintang. Suppose you can’t alw'ays buy all the 
cloth you n'ant, and you can’t get opium, it’s a fact you don’t 
pay taxes, isn’t it? You don’t go in debt to the landlords and 
lose your house and land, do you? Well, old brother, do 
you like the White Army better than us, or not? — just an- 
swer that question. What does the White Army give you for 
your crops, eh?” 

At this, all complaints appeared to melt away, and opin- 
ion was unanimous. “Certainly not, old Fu, certainly not!’’ 



262 EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

nodded our host. “If we have to choose, we take the Red 
Army. A son of mine is in the Red Army, and I sent him 
there. Does anyone deny that?” 

I asked why they preferred the Red Army. 

In answer the old man who had sneered at the co-opera- 
tives for having no opium gave a heated discourse. 

“What happens when the Whites come?” he asked. 
“They demand such and such amounts of food, and never a 
word about payment. If we refuse, we are arrested as Com- 
munists. If we give it to them we cannot pay the taxes. In 
any case, we cannot pay the taxes! What happens then? 
They take our animals to sell. Last year, when the Red 
Army was not here and the Whites returned, they took my 
two mules and my four pigs. These mules were worth $30 
each, and the pigs were full grown, worth $2 each. What 
did they give me? 

“Ai~ya,^i-ya! They said I owed $80 in taxes and rent, 
and they allowed me $40 for my stock. They demanded $40 
more. Could I get it? I had nothing else for them to steal.’ 
They wanted me to sell my daughter; it’s a fact! Some of us 
here had to do that. Those who had no cattle and no daugh- 
ters went to jail in Pao An, and plenty died from the 
cold. ...” 

I asked this old man how much land he had. 

“Land?” he croaked. “There is my land,” and he pointed 
to a hilltop patched with corn and millet and vegetables. It 
lay just across the stream from our courtyard. 

“How much is it worth?” 

“Land here isn’t worth anything unless it’s valley land,” 
he said. “We can buy a mountain like that for I25. What 
costs money are mules, goats, pigs, chickens, houses and 
tools.” 

“Well, how much is your farm worth, for example?” 

He still refused to count his land worth anything at all. 



CONVERSATION WITH RED PEASANTS 263 

“You can have the house, my animals and tools for $ 100 — 
with the mountain thrown in,” he finally estimated. 

“And on that you had to pay how much in taxes and 
rent?” 

“Forty dollars a year!” 

“That was before the Red Army came?” 

“Yes. Now we pay no taxes. But who knows about next 
year? When the Reds leave, the Whites come back. One 
year Red, the next White. When the Whites come they call 
us Red-bandits. When the Reds come they look for counter- 
revolutionaries.” 

“But there is this difference,” a young farmer interposed. 
“If our neighbours say we have not helped the Whites that 
satisfies the Reds. But if we have a hundred names of honest 
men, but no landlord’s name, we are still Red-bandits to the 
Whites! Isn’t that a fact?” 

The old man nodded his head. He said that the last time 
the White Army was here it had killed a whole family of 
poor farmers in a village just over the hill. Why? Because 
the Whites had asked where the Reds were hiding, and this 
family refused to tell them. “After that we all fled from 
here, and took our cattle with us. We came back with the 
Reds.” 

“Will you leave next time, if the Whites return? ” 

exclaimed an elder with long hair but fine teeth. 
“This time we will leave, certainly! -They will kill us!” 

He began to tell of the villagers’ crimes. They had joined 
the Poor People’s League, they had voted for the district 
Soviets, they had given information to the Red Army about 
the White Army’s movements, two had sons in the Red 
Army, and another had two daughters in a nursing school. 
Were these crimes or not? They could be shot for any one 
of them, I was assured. 

But now a barefooted youth in his teens stepped up, en- 



264 FN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

grossed in the discussion, and forgetful of the foreign devil. 
“You calf these things crimes, grandfather? These are patri- 
otic acts! Why do we do them? Isn’t it because our Red 
Anny is d poor people’s army and fights for our rights?” 

He continued enthusiastically: “Did we have a free 
school in Chou Chia before? Did we ever get news of the 
world before the Reds brought us wdreless electricity? Who 
told us what the world is like? You say the co-operative has 
no cloth, but did we ever even have a co-operative before? 
And how about your farm, wasn’t there a big mortgage on 
it to landlord Wang? My sister starved to death three years 
ago, but haven’t we had plenty to eat since the Reds came? 
You say it’s bitter, but it isn’t bitter for us young people if 
we can learn to read! It isn’t bitter for us Young Vanguards 
when we learn to use a rifle and fight the traitors and Japan!” ■ 

This constant reference to Japan and the “traitors” may 
sound improbable to people who know the ignorance (not 
indifference) of the mass of the ordinary Chinese peasants 
concerning Japanese invasions. But I found it constantly re- 
curring, not only in the speech of the Communists, but 
among peasants like these. Red propaganda had made a wide 
impression until many of these backward mountaineers be- 
lieve themselves in imminent danger of being enslaved 
by the “Japanese dwarfs” — a specimen of which most of 
them have yet to see outside Red posters and cartoons. 

The youth subsided, out of breath. I looked at Fu Chin- 
kuei and saw a pleased smirk on his face. Several others pres- 
ent called out in approval, and most of them smiled. 

The dialogue went on till nearly nine o’clock, long past 
bedtime. It interested me chiefly because-it took place before 
Fu Chin-kuei, vdiom the farmers appeared to hold in no 
awe as a Red “official.” They seemed to look upon him as 
one of themselves — and indeed, as a peasant’s son, he was. 

The last one to leave us was the old man wdth the queue 
and most of the complaints. As he went out the door he 



SOVIET INDUSTRIES 26? 

\ 

leaned over and whispered once more to Fu, “Old com- 
rade,” he implored, “is there any opium at Pao An; now, is 
there any?” 

When he had left, Fu turned to me in disgust. “Would 
you believe it?” he demanded. “That old defile-mother is 
chairman of the Poor People’s Society here, and still he 
wants opium! This village needs more educational work.” 




2 

Soviet Industries 

4 

A FEW days north-west of Pao An, on my way to the 
front, I stopped to visit Wu Ch’i Chen, a Soviet “in- 
dustrial centre” of Shensi. Wu Ch’i Chen was remarkable, 
not for any achievements in industrial science of which De- 
troit or Manchester need take note — as the reader will soon 
see — ^but because it was there at all. 

For hundreds of miles around there is only semi-pastoral 
country, the people live in cave-houses exactly as did their 
ancestors millenniums ago, many of the farmers still wear 
queues braided round their heads, and the horse, the ass and 
the camel are the last thing in communications. Rape-oil is 
used for lighting here, candles are a luxury, electricity is 
unknown, and foreigners are as rare as Eskimos in Africa. 

In this medieval world it was astonishing suddenly to 
come upon Soviet factories, and find machines turning, and 
a colony of workers busily producing the goods and tools of 
.a Red China. 

I knew that in Kiangsi the Communists had,^despite the 



266 EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

lack of a seaport and the handicap of an enemy blockade 
which cut them off from contact with any big modern in- ' 
dustrial base, built up several prosperous industries. They 
operated China’s richest tungsten mines, for example, an- 
nually turning out over one million pounds of this precious 
ore — secretly selling it to General Ch’en Chi-t’ang’s Kuang- 
tung tungsten monopoly. In the central Soviet printing plant 
at Kian with its 800 workers, many books, magazines, and a 
big “national” paper — the Red China Daily News — ^Avere 
published. 

In Kiangsi also were weaving plants, textile mills and 
machine-shops. Small industries produced sufficient manu- 
factured goods to supply their simple needs. The Reds claim 
to have had a “foreign export trade” of over $12,000,000 in 
1933, most of which was carried on through adventurous 
southern merchants, who made enormous profits by running 
the Kuomintang blockade. The bulk of manufacturing, 
however, was by handicraft and home industry, the prod- 
ucts of which were sold through production co-operatives. . 

According to Mao Tse-tung, in September, 1933, the 
Soviets had 1,423 “production and distribution” co-opera- 
tives in Kiangsi, all owned and run by the people.^ Testi- 
mony by League of Nations investigators leaves little doubt 
that the Reds were succeeding with this type of collective 
enterprise — even while they were still fighting for their ex- 
istence. The Kuomintang itself is in fact attempting to copy 
the Red system in parts of the South, but results thus far 
suggest that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to op- 
erate such co-operatives under a strictly laissez-faire capi- 
talism. 

But in the North-west I had not expected to find any 
industry at all. Much greater handicaps faced the Reds here 
than in the South, for even a small machine industry was al- 

^ China-. President Mao Tse-tiing Reports on Progress, etc., 

p. 26. 



SOVIET INDUSTRIES 


267 

most entirely absent before the Soviets were set up. In the 
whole North-west, in Shensi, Kansu, Chinghai, Ninghsia and 
Suiyuan, provinces in area nearly the size of all Europe ex- 
cluding Russia, the combined machine-industt}'’ investment 
certainly must be considerably less than the plant of one 
big assembly branch of, for instance, the Ford Motor Com- 
pany. 

Sian and Lanchow have a few small modern factories, 
but for the most part are dependent upon the bigger indus- 
trial centres farther east. Any major development of the 
tremendous industrial possibilities of the North-west can 
only take place by borrowing technique and machinery 
from the outside. And if this is true in Sian and Lanchow, 
the two great cities of the region, the difficulties confront- 
ing the Reds, occupying the even more backward areas of 
Kansu, Shensi and Ninghsia, should be manifest. 

The blockade, of course, cut off the Soviet Government 
from imports of machinery, and from “imports” of techni- 
cians. Of the latter, however, the Reds said their supply was 
at present ample. Machinery and raw materials were more 
serious problems. Battles have been fought by the Red Army 
just to get a few lathes, weaving machines, engines or scrap 
iron. Nearly everything they had in the category of ma- 
chinery while I was there had been “captured”! During their 
expedition to Shansi province in 1936, for example, they 
seized machines, tools and raw materials, which were carried 
by mule all the way across the mountains of Shensi, to their 
fantastic cliff-dwelling factories. 

The southern Reds, when they came up to the North- 
west spurred on an “industrial boom.” They brought with 
them (6,000 miles, over some of the world’s most difficult 
routes) many lathes, turning machines, stampers, dies, etc. 
They brought dozens of Singer sewing machines, which 
now equip their clothing factories; they brought silver and 
gold from the Red mines in Szechuan; and they brought 



268 EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

lithographing blocks and light printing machines. Small 
wonder that the Reds have respect and affection for ponies 
and mules, especially those plucky animals that carried their 
burdens up from the southland! 

Soviet industries, when 1 visited Red China, included 
clothing, uniform, shoe, and paper factories at Pao An, and 
Holienwan (Kansu), rug factories at Tingpien (on the 
Great Wall), mines at Yung P’ing which produce the cheap- 
est coaP in China, and woollen and cotton spinning factories 
in several hsien — all of which had plans to produce enough 
goods to stock the 400 co-operatives in Red Shensi and 
Kansu. The aim of the then “industrial programme,” accord- 
ing to Mao Tse-ming, Commissioner of People’s Economy, 
was to make Red China “economically self-sufficient” — 
strong enough to survive despite the Kuomintang blockade 
— if Nanking refused to accept the Communists’ offers for 
a “United Front” and a cessation of civil war. 

Biggest and most important of the Soviet State enter- 
prises were the salt-refining plants at Yen Ch’ih, the great 
salt lakes on the Ninghsia border, along the Great Wall; 
and the oil wells at Yung P’ing and Yen Ch’ang, which pro- 
duced petrol, paraffin, and vaseline, wax, candles and other 
by-products. Salt deposits at Yen Ch’ih are the finest in 
China and yield beautiful rock-crystal salt in large quantities. 
Consequently salt was cheaper and more plentiful in the 
Soviet districts than in Kuomintang China, where it is made 
a principal source of Government income. After the capture 
of Yen Ch’ih the Reds won the sympathy of the Mongols 
north of the Wall by agreeing to turn over part of the pro- 
duction to them, revoking the Kuomintang’s practice of 
monopolizing the entire output. 

^ The price quoted in the Red districts was 800 catties — about half 
a ton — for Si silver. Cf. “Economic Construction in the Kansu and 
Shensi Soviet Districts,” by Mao Tse-ming, Toit Tsinig (Struggle) , 
April 24, 1936 (Pao An, Shensi). 



SOVIET INDUSTRIES 269 

North Shensi’s oil wells are the only ones in China, and 
their output was formerly sold to an American company, 
which had leases on other reserves in the district. After 
they had seized Yung P’ing the Reds sank two new wells, 
and claimed increased production, by about 40 per cent 
over any previous period, when Yung P’ing and Yen Ch’ang 
were in “non-bandit” hands. This included increases of 
“2,000 catties of petrol, 25,000 catties of first-class oil, and 
1 3,500 catties of second-class oil” during a three-month era 
reported upon.^ 

Efforts were being made to develop cotton-growing in 
areas cleared of poppies, and the Reds had established a spin- 
ning-school at An Ting, tvith 100 women students. The 
workers were given three hours’ general education daily and 
five hours’ instruction in spinning and weaving. Upon com- 
pletion of their course, after three months, students were 
sent to various districts to open textile factories. “It is ex- 
pected that in n\m years North Shensi will be able to pro- 
duce its entire supply of cloth.”- 

But Wu Ch’i Chen had the largest concentration of fac^ 
tory workers in the Red districts, and was important also as 
the location of the Reds’ main arsenal. It commanded an im- 
portant trade route leading to Kansu, and the ruins of two 
ancient forts nearby testified to its former strategic impor- 
tance. The present town is built higii up on the steep clay 
banks of a rapid stream, and is made up half of yang-fang, or 
“foreign houses” — as the Shensi natives still call anything 
that has four sides and a roof—and half of yao-fang, or 
cave-dwellings. 

I arrived late at night and I was very tired. The head of 
the supply commissariat for the front armies had received 
word of my coming, and he rode out to meet me. He ^ 
“put me up” at a workers’ Lenin Club — an earthen-floored 

^ Op. cit. 

" Op. cit. 



2/0 EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

y do-fang with clean whitewashed walls strung with festoons 
of coloured paper chains encircling a portrait of the im- 
mortal Ilyitch. 

Hot water, clean towels — stamped with New Life slo- 
gans! — and soap soon appeared. They were followed by an 
ample dinner, with good baked bread. I began to feel better. 
I unrolled my bedding on the table-tennis court and lighted 
a cigarette. But man is a difficult animal to satisfy. All this 
luxury and attention only made me yearn for my favourite 
beverage. 

And then, of all things, this commissar suddenly pro- 
duced, from heaven knows where, some rich brown coffee 
and sugar! Wu Ch’i Chen had won my heart. 

“Products of our five-year plan!” the commissar laughed. 

“Products of your confiscation department, you mean,” 
I amended. I think it must have been stolen fruit at that, for 
it had all the charms of the illicit. 



0 

^^They Smg Too Much” 
4 

I STAYED three days at Wu Ch’i Chen, visiting workers 
J.. in the factories, “inspecting” their working conditions, 
attending their theatre and their political meetings, reading 
their wall newspapers and their character-books, talking — 
and getting athletic. For I took part in a basketball game on ^ 
one of "Wu Ch’i’s three courts. We made up a scratch team 
composed of the Foreign Office emissary, Fu Chin-kuei, a 
young English-speaking college student working in the 



“they sing too much” 271 

political department, a Red doctor, a soldier, and myself. 
The arsenal basketball team accepted our challenge and beat 
us to a pulp. Quite literally, in my own case. 

Those arsenal workers could make guns, too, as well as 
toss goals. I spent a day in their unusual factory and had 
lunch in their Lenin Club. 

The arsenal, like the Red Academy, was housed in a big 
series of vaulted rooms built into a mountain-side. They 
were cool, well ventilated and lighted by a series of shafts 
sunk at angles in the walls, and had the major advantage of 
being completely bomb-proof. Here I found over a hundred 
workers making hand grenades, trench-mortars, gunpowder, 
pistols, small shells and bullets, and a few farming tools. A 
repair department was engaged in rehabilitating stacks of 
broken rifles, machine-guns, automatic rifles, and sub-ma- 
chine-guns. But the arsenal’s output was crude work, and 
most of its products equipped the Red partisans, the regular 
Red forces being supplied almost entirely with guns and 
munitions captured from enemy troops! 

. Ho Hsi-yang, director of the arsenal, took me through 
its various chambers, introduced his vmrkers, and told me 
something about them and himself. He was thirty-si.x, un- 
married, and had formerly been a technician in the famous 
Mukden arsenal, before the Japanese invasion. After Septem- 
ber 18, 1931, he went to Shanghai, and there he joined the 
Communist Party, later on making his way to the North- 
west, and into Red areas. Most of the machinists here were 
also “outside” men. Many had been employed at Hanyang, 
China’s greatest iron works (Japanese-owned), and a few 
had worked in Kuomintang arsenals. I met two young 
Shanghai master mechanics, and an expert fitter, who 
showed me excellent letters of recommendation from the 
noted British and American firms of Jardine, Matheson & 
Co., Anderson Meyer & Co., and the Shanghai Power Com-' 
pany. Another had been foreman in a Shanghai machine- 



272 EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT 

shop. There were also machinists from Tientsin, Canton and 
Peiping, and some had made the Long March with the Red 
Army. 

I learned that of the 114 arsenal machinists and appren- 
tices only 20 were married. These had their wives with them 
in AVu Ch’i Chen, either as factory workers or as party 
functionaries. In the arsenal trade-union, which represented 
the most highly skilled labour in the Red' districts, there Avas 
a big percentage of Party membership. Over 80 per cent 
belong to the Communist Party or to the Communist Youth 
League. 

Besides the arsenal in Wu Ch’i Chen there were cloth 
and uniform factories, a shoe factory, a stocking factory, 
and a pharmacy and drug dispensary, with a doctor in at- 
tendance. He was a youth just out of a medical training 
school of Shansi, and his young and pretty wife was with 
him working as a nurse. Both of them had joined the Reds 
during the Shansi expedition last winter. Nearby was a 
hospital, with three army doctors in attendance, and taken 
up mostly with wounded soldiers, and there was a radio sta- 
tion, a crude laboratory, a co-operative, and the army sup- 
ply base. 

Except in the arsenal, and uniform factory, most of the 
workers were young women from eighteen up to twenty- 
five or thirty. Some of them were married to Red soldiers 
then at the front; nearly all were Kansu, Shensi or Shansi 
'women; and all had bobbed hair. “Equal pay for equal la- 
bour” is a slogan of the Chinese Soviets, and there is sup- 
posed to be no wage-discrimination against women. Labour 
appears to get preferential financial treatment over every- 
body else in the Soviet districts. This includes Red com- 
manders, who receive no regular salaiy, but onlv a small 
living allowance, which varies according to the weight of 
the treasury. 



“they sing too much’’ 273 

Wu Ch’i Chen was headquarters of pretty Miss Liu 
'Ch’iin-hsien, aged twenty-nine. She was a former mill- 
worker from Wusih and Shanghai, and had been a friend of 
Rhena Prohm when she was a student in Moscow’s Chung 
Shan University. Now she was director of the women’s de- 
partment of the Red trade-unions. Miss Liu described work- 
ing conditions to me. Factory workers got from $10 to I15 
monthly, with board and room furnished by the State. 
Workers were guaranteed free medical attention, aqd com- 
pensation for injuries. Women were given four months of 
rest with pay during and after pregnancy, and there was a 
crude “nursery” for workers’ children — but most of them 
seemed to run wild as soon as they could walk. Mothers 
could collect part of their “social insurance” which was pro- 
vided from a fund created by deducting 10 per cent of the 
workers’ salaries, to which the Government added an equal 
amount. The Government also contributed the equivalent 
of 2 per cent of the entire wage output for workers’ educa- 
tion and recreation, and these funds were managed jointly 
by the trade-unions and the workers’ factory committees. 
There was an eight-hour day and a six-day week. When I 
visited them the factories were running twenty-four hours 
a- day, with three shifts working — probably the busiest 
plants in China! 

All this sounds very progressive, though perhaps far 
from a Communistic Utopia. The fact that these conditions 
were actually being realized, in the midst of the Soviets’ 
struggle for life, is really interesting. How prbmtively they 
were being realized is quite another matter! They had clubs, 
schools, ample dormitories — all these, certainly — ^but in 
cave-houses with earthen floors, no shower baths, no movies, 
no electricity. They were furnished food; but meals con- 
sisted of millet, vegetables and sometimes mutton, with no 
delicacies whatever. They collected their wages and social 



274 en route to the front 

insurance all right, in Soviet currency, but the articles they 
could buy v’'ere strictly limited to necessities — and none too 
much of those! 

“Unbearable!” the average American or English worker 
would say. But obviously it wasn’t to these people. You have 
to contrast their life with the system elsewhere in China to 
understand why. I remembered, for example, the hundreds 
of factories where little boy and girl slave-workers sit or 
stand at their tasks twelve or thirteen hours a day, and then 
drop, in exhausted sleep, to the dirty cotton quilt, their bed, 
directly beneath their machine. I remembered little girls in 
silk filatures, and the pale young women in cotton factories 
— all of them, like most factory contract labour in Shanghai, 
literally sold into these jobs as virtual slaves for four or five 
years, unable to leave the heavily guarded, high-\valled 
premises, day or night, without special permission. And I 
remembered that during 1935 more than 29,000 bodies were 
picked up from the streets and rivers and canals of Shanghai 
— bodies of the destitute poor, and the starved or drowned 
babies or children they could not feed. 

But, for these workers in Wu Ch’i Chen, however primi- 
tive it might be, here was a life at least of good health, exer- 
cise, clean mountain air, freedom, dignity and hope, in 
which there was room for growth. They knew that nobody 
was making money out of them, I think they felt they were 
working for themselves and for China, and they said they 
were revohitionaries\ In this way I understood why they 
took so seriously their two hours of daily reading and writ- 
ing, their political lectures, and their dramatic groups, and 
why they keenly contested for the miserable prizes offered 
in competitions between groups and individuals in sport, 
literacy, public health, wall newspapers, and “factory effi- 
ciency.” All these things were real to them, things they had 
never known before, could never possibly know in any 



“they sing too much” 275 

other factory of China, and they seemed grateful for the 
doors of life opened up for them. 

Well, it is all hard for any old China hand like myself 
to believe, and I am still confused about its ultimate sig- 
nificance, but I cannot deny the evidence I saw. Here space 
prevents me from presenting that evidence in detail. I should 
have to tell a dozen stories of workers to whom I talked; 
quote to you from their essays and criticisms in the wall 
newspapers — ^written in the childish scrawl of the newly 
literate — many of which I translated, with, the aid of the 
college student; tell you of the political meetings I a.ttended; 
and of the plays created and dramatized by these workers; 
and of the many little things that go to make up that in- 
tangible, an “impression.” 

But I just happen to remember one of those “little 
things” as I write. I met an electrical engineer there, a bril- 
liant but very serious-minded Communist named Chu Tso- 
chih. He knew English and German very well, he was a 
power expert, and he had written an engineering text-book 
widely used in China. He had once been with the Shanghai 
Pov^er Company, and later with Anderson Meyer & Co. Un-, 
til recently he had had a practice of §10,000 a year in South 
China, where he was a consulting engineer and efficiency 
man, and had given it up and left his family to come up to 
these wild dark hills of Shensi and offer his services to the 
Reds for nothing. Incredible! The background of this phe- 
nomenon traced to a beloved grandfather, a famous philan- 
thropist of Ningpo, whose deathbed injunction to young 
Chu had been to “devote his life to raisingr the cultural 
standard of the masses.” And Chu had decided the quickest 
method was the Communist one. 

I think Chu had come into the thing somewhat melodra- 
matically, in the spirit of the martyr and zealot. It was a 
solemn thing for him; he thought it meant an early death. 



EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT - 


276 

and he expected everyone else to feel that way. I believe he 
was a little shocked when he found so much that he consid- 
ered horse-play going on, and everybody apparently happy. 
When I asked him how he liked it, he replied gravely that 
he had but one serious criticism. “These people spend en- 
tirely too much time singingV he complained. “This is no 
time to be singing!” 

It seemed to me to sum up a great deal about the youth- 
ful bravado of this singular “industrial centre” of Soviet 
Shensi. They had the spirit of Socialist industry, even if 
they lacked its materials! 



r^J 

PART EIGHT: WITH THE RED ARM'S 

I 

The ‘’’’Rear Red Army 

4 > 

A t last, after two weeks of hacking and walking over 
. the hills and plains of Kansu and Ninghsia, I came to 
Yu Wang Pao, a big walled town in southern Ninghsia, 
which was then the headquarters of the First Front Red 
Army — and of its Commander-in-Chief P’eng Teh-huai. 

Although in a strict military sense all Red M-arriors might 
be called “irregulars” (and some people would say “highly 
irregulars”), the Reds themselves made a sharp distinction 
between their front armies, independent armies, partisans, 
and peasant guards. During my first brief travels in Shensi 
I had not seen any of the “regular” Red Army, for its main 
forces were then moving in the west, nearly two hundred 
miles from Pao An. I had planned a trip to the front, but 
news that Chiang Kai-shek was preparing to launch another 
major offensive from the south had inclined .me towards the 
better part of valour, and an early departure while I could 
still get past the lines to write my story. 

One day I had expressed these doubts to Wu Liang-p’ing, 
the young Soviet official who had acted as interpreter in 
my long official interviews with Mao Tse-tung. Although. 
Wu was a rosy-cheeked lad of twenty-six, he was already 
the author of two books on dialectics. But, having found 

277 



278 AVITH THE RED ARMY 

him a A^ery likable sort, Avith a sense of humour on eA^ery- 
thing but dialectics, I considered him my friend, and I had 
frankly disclosed my apprehensions to him. 

He had been dumbfounded. “You have a chance to go 
to the front, and you Avonder whether you should take it? 
Don’t make such a mistake! Chiang Kai-shek has been trying 
to destroy us for ten years, and he is not going to succeed 
noAv. You can’t go back without seeing the real Red Army!” 
And he had produced evidence to shoAV why I shouldn’t. 
What had impressed me most was that the mere idea of go- 
ing to the front had aroused such enthusiasm in him, a sea- 
soned Bolshevik and A'^eteran of the Long March. I had de- 
cided there must be something to see. And so I had made 
the long trip, and safely reached the scene of operations of 
Wu Liang-p’ing’s real Red Army. 

It Avas Avell that I took his advice. Had I not done so I 
AAmuld have left Pao An still wondering hoAv the Reds had 
Avon their reputation for invincibility. 1 Avould have left still 
unconvinced of the youth, the spirit, the training, the dis- 
cipline, the excellent equipment, and especially the high po- 
litical morale, of the regular Red Army. I would haA’^e left 
AAUthout understanding that this is the only politically iron- 
clad army in China. 

Perhaps the best Avay to approach an understanding of 
these so-called bandits is — statistical. For I found the Reds 
had complete data on all their regularly enlisted men. The 
facts I shall assemble beloAv, Avlrich seem to me highly in- 
teresting and significant, Avere furnished from his files by 
Yang Shan-lcun, the Russian-speaking, tAventy-nine-year-old 
chairman of the political department of the First Front Red 
Army. With a feAV'’ exceptions, I confine this statistical re- 
port to matters Avhich I had some opportunity to verify from 
personal impression and observation. 

First of all, many people suppose the Reds to be a hard- 
bitten lot of outlaAA'^s and malcontents. I vaguely had some 



THE “real” red army 279 

such notion myself. But I soon discovered I was quite mis- 
taken. The great mass of the Red soldiery was made up of 
young peasants and workers who believed themselves to be 
fighting for their homes, their land, and their country. 

According to Yang, the average age of the rank and file 
was nineteen. This was easily believable. Although many 
men v/ith the Reds had fought for seven or eight or et'^en 
ten years, they were balanced by a vast number of youths 
still in their middle teens. And even most of the “old Bol- 
sheviks,” veterans of many battles, were only now in their 
early twenties. The majority had joined the Reds as Young 
V anguards, or enlisted at the age of fifteen or sixteen.. 

In the First Front Anuy a total of 38 per cent of the men 
came from either the agrarian working class (including 
craftsmen, muleteers, apprentices, farm labourers, etc.) or 
from the industrial working class, while 58 per cent came 
from the peasantry. Only 4 per cent were from the petty 
bourgeoisie — ^sons of merchants, intellectuals, small land- 
lords, and such. In this army over 50 per cent of the troops, 
including commanders, were members of the Communist 
Party or the Communist Youth League. 

Between 60 and 70 per cent of the soldiers were literate 
— that is, they could write simple letters and texts, posters, 
handbills, etc. This was much higher than the average among 
ordinary troops in the White districts, and it was very much 
higher than the average in the peasantr)’- of the North-west, 
Red soldiers began to study characters from Red texts, spe- 
cially prepared for them, from the day of their enlistment. 
Prizes were offered (cheap notebooks, pencils, tassels, etc., 
much valued by the soldiers) for rapid progress and a 
great effort was made to stimulate the spirit of ambition 
and competition. 

Red soldiers, like their commanders, received no regular 
salaries. But every enlisted man was entitled to his portion of 
land, and some income from it. This was tilled in his ab- 



; So AVITH THE RED ARMY 

< ence, either by his family or his local Soviet. If he was not 
a native of the Soviet districts, however, his remuneration 
came from a share in the proceeds of crops from “public 
lands” (confiscated from the great landlords), which also 
helped provision the Red Army. Public lands were tilled by 
villagers in the local Soviets. Such free labour was obliga- 
tory, but the majority of the peasants, having benefited in 
the land redistribution, co-operated willingly enough to de- 
fend a system that had bettered their livelihood. 

The average age of the officers in the Red Army was 
cwenty-four. This included squad leaders and all officers up 
to army commanders, but despite their youth these men had 
behind them an average of eight years’ fighting experience 
each. All company commanders or higher were literate, 
though I met several who had not learned to read and write 
till after they had entered the Red Army. About a third of 
the Red commanders were former Kuomintang soldiers. 
Among Red commanders were many graduates of Wham- 
poa Academy (Chiang Kai-shek’s officers’ training school), 
graduates of the Red Army Academy in Moscow, former 
officers of Chang Hsueh-liang’s “North-eastern Army,” ca- 
dets of the Paoting Military Academy, former Kuominchun 
(“Christian General” Feng Yii-hsiang’s army) men, and a 
number of returned students from France, Soviet Russia, 
Germany and England. I met only one returned student 
from America. The Reds don’t call themseh''es ping, or “sol- 
diers’’ — a v'ord to which there is attached much odium in 
China — but eban-shih, Avhich means “fighters” or “warriors.” 

The majority of the soldiers as v/ell as officers of the 
Red Army were unmarried. Many of them tvere “divorced” 
— that is, they had left their Mdv^es and families behind them. 
In several cases I had serious suspicions that the desire for 
this kind of divorce, in fact, might have had something to 
do with their joining the army, but this may be a cynical 
opinion. 



THE “real” red army 281 

My impression, from scores of conversations on the road 
and at the front, was that over half of these “Red fighters” 
were still virgins. There were few Communist women at the 
front with' the army, and they are nearly all Soviet func- 
tionaries in their own right or married to Soviet officials. 

As far as I could see or learn, the Reds treated the peas- 
ant women and girls with respect, and the peasantry seemed 
to have a good opinion of Red Army morality. I heard of 
no cases of rape or abuse of the peasant women, though I 
heard from some of the southern soldiers of “sweethearts” 
left behind them. There was no law against fornication but 
any Red Army man who got into difficulties with a girl was 
expected to marry her. As men far outnumbered women 
here, the opportunities were few. There was little promis- 
cuity; a vigorous daily routine kept the young troops occu- 
pied. Very few of the Reds smoked or drank; abstention was 
one of the “eight disciplines” of the Red Army, and, al- 
though no special punishment was provided for either vice, 
I read in the “black column” of wall newspapers several 
grave criticisms of habitual smokers. Drinking was not for- 
bidden, but was discouraged. Drunkenness, as nearly as I 
could see or learn, was utterly unheard of. 

Commander P’eng Teh-huai, who used to be a Kuomin- 
tang general, told me that the extreme youth of the Red 
Army explained much of its capacity to withstand hardship, 
and that was quite believable. It also made the problem of 
feminine companionship less poignant. P’eng himself had 
not seen his own wife since 1928, when he led an uprising of 
Kuomintang troops and joined the Reds. 

"Casualties among Red Army commanders were very 
high. They customarily went into battle side by side Yuth 
their men, from regimental commanders down. Joe Stilwell 
once said to me that one thing alone might explain the fight- 
ing power of the Reds against an enemy with vastly superior 
resources. That is the Red officers’ habk of saying, “Come 



282 


WITH THE RED ARMY 

on, boys:” instead of, “Go on, boys!” During Nanking’s 
First and Second “final annihilation” Campaigns, casualties 
among Red officers were often as high as 50 per cent. But 
the Red Army could not stand these sacrifices, and later 
adopted tactics tending somewhat to reduce the risk of life 
by experienced commanders. Nevertheless, in the Fifth 
Kiangsi Campaign, Red commanders’ casualties averaged 
about 23 per cent of the total officer personnel. You could 
see plenty of evidence of this in the Red districts. Common 
sights were youths still in their early twenties with an arm 
or a leg missing, or fingers shot away, or with ugly wounds 
on the head or anatomy — but still cheerful optimists about 
their revolution. 

Nearly every province in China was represented in the 
various Red armies. In this sense it was probably the only 
really national army in China. It was also the “most widely 
travelled”! Veteran cadres had crossed parts of eighteen 
provinces. They probably knew more about Chinese geog- 
raphy than any other army. On their Long March they 
found most of the old Chinese maps quite useless, and Red 
cartographers remapped many hundreds of miles of terri- 
toiy, especially in aboriginal country, and on the western 
frontiers. 

In the First Front Army, consisting of about 30,000 men, 
there was a big percentage of southerners, about one-third 
coming from Kdangsi, Fukien, Hunan or Kweichow. Nearly 
40 per cent were from the western provinces of Szechuan, 
Shensi, and Kansu. The First Front Army included some 
aborigines — Miaos and Lolos — and also attached to it was a 
nev'ly organized Mohammedan Red Army. In the independ- 
ent armies the percentage of natives was much higher, aver- 
aging three-fourths of the total. 

From the highest commander down to the rank and file 
these men ate and dressed alike. Battalion commanders and 
higher, how'ever, were entitled to the use of a horse or a 



THE “real” red army 20', 

mule. I noticed there was even an equal sharing of the deli- 
cacies available — expressed, while I was with the Red Army, 
chiefly in terms of watermelons and plums. There was veiq 
little difference in living quarters of commanders and men, 
and they passed freely back and forth without any for • 
mality. 

One thing had puzzled me. How did the Reds manage t(.> 
feed, clothe and equip their armies? Like many others, I had 
assumed that they must live entirely on loot. Tills I discov- 
ered to be wrong, as I have already shown, for I saw that 
they started to construct a self-supplying economy of their 
own as soon as they occupied a district, and this single fact 
made it possible for them to hold a base despite enemy 
blockade. I had also failed to realize on what almost unbe- 
lievably modest sums it was possible for a Chinese proletar- 
ian army to exist. 

To begin with, the Reds had practically no output of 
armaments; their enemy was really their main source of sup- 
ply. For years the Reds had called the Kuomintang troops 
their “ammunition-carriers.” From enemy troops they 
claimed to capture more than 8o per cent of their guns, and 
more than 70 per cent of their ammunition. If this is hard to 
believe, I can bear witness to the fact that the regular troops 
I saw were equipped with British, Czecho-Slovakian, Ger- 
man and American machine-guns, rifles, automatic rifles, 
Mausers, and mountain cannon, such as have been sold in 
large quantities to the Nanking Government.^ 

The only Russian-made rifles I saw with the Reds were 
the vintage of 1917. These had been captured from the 
troops of General Ma Hung-kuei, as I heard directly from 
some of Ma’s ex-soldiers themselves. General Ma, governor 

^ “Questioned as to the source of the Reds’ munitions. Generalis- 
simo Chiang admitted that most of them had been taken from de- 
feated Government troops." In an interview with the North China 
Daily News, October 9, 1954. 



284 AVITH THE RED ARMY 

of what remained of Kuomintang Ninghsia, had inherited 
these rifles from “Christian General” Feng Yii-hsiang, who 
ruled this region in 1924, and got some arms from Outer 
Mongolia. Red regulars disdained to use these ancient weap- 
ons, which I saw only in the hands of the partisans. 

While I was in the Soviet districts any contact Avith a 
Russian source of arms Avas physically impossible, for the 
Reds were encompassed by various enemy troops totalling 
nearly 400,000 men, and the enemy controlled every road to 
Outer Mongolia, Sinkiang or the U.S.S.R. I gathered that 
they Avould be glad to get some of the manna they were fre- 
quently accused of receiving, by some miracle from Russia. 
But it was quite obvious from a glance at the map that, until 
the Chinese Reds possessed much more territory to the north 
and to the west, Moscoav Avould be unable to fill any orders, 
assuming /Moscow to be so inclined, which was open to seri- 
ous doubts. 

Secondly, it was a fact that the Reds had no high-paid 
and squeezing officials and generals, Avho in other Chinese 
armies absorbed most of the military funds. The greatest 
imaginable frugality AA^as practised both in the army and the 
Soviets. In effect, about the only burden of the army upon 
the people Avas the necessity of feeding and clothing it. 

Actually, as I have already said, the entire budget of the 
North-Avest SoAuets, occupying an area about the size of 
England, Avas then only $320,000 a month! Of the stagger- 
ing sum mentioned, nearly 60 per cent went to the mainte- 
nance of the armed forces. Old Lin Pai-ch’u, the finance 
commissioner, Avas apologetic about this, but said it Avas “in- 
evitable until the revolution has been consolidated”! The 
armed forces then numbered (not including peasant auxil- 
iaries) about 40,000 men. This Avas before the arriA^al in 
Kansu of the Second and Fourth Front Armies, after which 
Red territory greatly expanded, and the main Red forces in 
the North-Avest soon approached a total of 90,000 men. 


IMPRESSION OF P’eNG TEH-HUAI 285 

So much for statistics. But really to understand why the 
Chinese Reds have survived ail these years it is necessarv to 
get a glimpse of their innex»spirit, their morale and fighting 
will and their methods of training. And, perhaps still more 
important, their political and military leadership. 

For example, v^hat sort of man is P’eng Teh-huai, Red 
Commander-in-Chief, for whose head Nanking once offered 
a reward sufficient to maintain his whole army (if Finance 
Commissioner Lin Pai-ch’u’s figures are correct) for more 
than a month? 


-4 


2 

Impression of P’eng Teh-hnai 


T he consolidation of command of the First, Second and 
Fourth Front Red Armies had not yet occurred when 
I visited the front in August and September. Eight divisions 
of the First Front Red Army were then holding a line from 
the Great W all in Ninghsia down to Kuyuan and Pingliang 
in Kansu. A vanguard of the First Army Corps was moving 
southward and westy^ard, to clear a road for Chu Teh, who 
was leading the Second and Fourth Front Annies up from 
Sikong and Szechuan, breaking through a deep cordon of 
Nanking troops in southern Kansu. Yu \^^ang Pao, an an- 
cient Mohammedan walled city in south-east Ninghsia, was 
headquarters of the First Front Army, and here I found its 
staff and Commander P’emr Teh-huai. 

P’eng’s career as a “Red-bandit” beran almost a decade 
ago, when he led an uprising in the Kuomintang army of the 



286 WITH THE RED ARMY 

polygamous warlord-governor, General Ho Qiien. P’eng 
had' risen from the ranks and won admission to a military 
school in Hunan and later on to another school at Nanchang. 
After graduation he had quickly distinguished himself and 
secured rapid promotions. By 1927, when he was twenty- 
eight years old, he was already a brigade commander, and 
noted throughout the Hunanese army as the “liberal” officer 
who actually consulted his soldiers’ committee. 

P’eng’s influence in the then Left-wing Kuomintang, in 
the army, and in the Hunan military school, were serious 
problems for Ho Chien. In the winter of 1927 General Ho 
began a drastic purgation of Leftists in his troops, and 
launched the notorious Hunan “Peasant Massacre,” in which 
thousands of radical farmers and -workers were killed as 
“Communists.” Against P’eng he hesitated to act, however, 
because of his widespread popularity. It was a costly delay. 
In July, 1928, with his own famous First Regiment as nu- 
cleus, and joined by parts of the Second and Third Regi- 
ments and the cadets of the military school, P’eng Teh-huai 
directed the P’in-kiang Insurrection, which united with a 
peasant uprising, and established the first Hunan Soviet 
Government. 

Two years later P’eng had accumulated an “iron broth- 
erhood” of about 8,000 followers, and this was the Fifth Red 
Army Corps. With this force he attacked and captured the 
great walled city of Changsha, capital of Hunan, and put to 
rout Ho Chien’s army of 60,000 men — then mostly opium- 
smokers. The Red Army held this city for ten days, against 
counter-attacks by combined Nanking-Hunan troops, but 
was finally forced to evacuate by greatly superior forces, 
including bombardment by foreign gunboats. 

It was shortly afterguards that Chiang Kai-shek began his 
First “grand annihilation” Campaign against the Red-bandits. 
The stoiy of these campaigns has been outlined. On the 
Long March of the southern Reds, P’eng Teh-huai was com- 



IMPRESSION OF p’eNG TEH-HUAI 287 

mandcr of the vanguard First Army Corps. He broke 
through lines of tens of thousands of enemy troops, captured 
vital points on the route of advance, and secured communi- 
cations for the main forces, at last winning his way to Shensi 
and a refuge in the base of the North-west Soviets. Men in 
his army told me that he walked most of the 6,000 miles of 
the Long March, frequently giving his horse to a tired or 
wounded comrade. 

With such a history of struggle behind him, I expected 
P’eng to be a weary, grim, fanatical leader. I found him, on 
the contrary, a gay, laughter-loving man, in excellent health 
except for a delicate stomacli — the result of a week’s forced 
diet of uncooked wheat grains and grass during the Long 
March, and of semi-poisonous food, and of a few days of no 
food at all. Veteran of scores of battles, he had been 
wounded but once, and then only superficially. 

I stayed in the compound where P’eng had his head- 
quarters in Yu Wang Pao, and so I saw a great deal of him 
at the front. This headquarters, by the way — then in com- 
mand of oyer 30,000 troops^was a simple room furnished 
with a table and wooden bench, nvo iron dispatch-boxes, 
maps made by the Red Army, a field telephone, a towel and 
washbasin, and the k'’aiig on which v'as spread his blankets. 
He had only a couple of uniforms, like the rest of his men. 
and they bore no insignia of rank. One personal article of 
attire, of which he was childishly proud, v'as a vest made 
from a parachute, captured from an enemy aeroplane sh.ov 
dotyn during the Long March. 

We shared many meals together. He ate sparingly and 
simply,' of the same food his men were given — consisting 
usually of cabbage, noodles, beans, mutton, and sometimes 
bread. Ninghsia grew beautiful melons of all kinds, and 
P’eng was very fond of these. Your pampered investigator, 
however, found P’eng poor competition in the business of 
melon-eating, but had to bow before sfreater talents of one 

O' O 



2 88 WITH THE RED ARMY 

of the doctors on P’eng’s staff, whose capacity had won him 
the nickname of Han Ch’ih-kua-ti (Han the Melon-Eater). 

I must admit that P’eng impressed me. There was some- 
thing open, forthright, and undeviating in his manner and 
speech which I liked. Quick in his movements and speech, 
full of laughter and a great wit, he was physically very ac- 
tive, an excellent rider, a man of endurance. Perhaps this was 
partly because he v^as a non-smoker and a teetotaller. I was ^ 
■with him one day during manoeuvres of the Red Second 
Division, when we had to climb a very steep hUl. “Run to 
the top!” P’eng suddenly called out to his panting staff and 
me. He bounded off like a rabbit, and beat us all to the sum- 
mit. Another time, when we were riding, he yelled out a 
similar challenge. In this way and others he gave the impres- 
sion of great unspent energy. 

P’eng retired late and arose early, unlike Mao Tse-tung 
who retired late and also got up late. As far as I could learn, 
P’eng slept an average of only four or five hours a night. He 
never seemed rushed, but he was always busy. I remember 
how astonished I was the morning of the day the First Army 
Corps received orders to advance 200 li to Haiyuan, in en- 
emy territory: P’eng issued all the commands necessary be- 
fore breakfast and came down to eat with me; immediately 
afterwards he started off on the road, as if for an excursion 
to the countryside, walking along the main street of Yu 
Wang Pao with his staff, stopping to speak to the Moslem 
priests who had assembled tp bid him good-bye. The big 
army seemed to run itself. 

Incidentally, although Government aeroplanes fre- 
quently dropped leaflets, over Red lines, offering from $50,- 

000 to §100,000 for P’eng, dead or alive, he had only one sen- 
try on duty before his headquarters, and he walked up and 
down the streets of the city without any bodyguard. While 

1 was there, when thousands of handbills had been dropped 
offering rewards for himself, Hsu Hai-tung, and Mao Tse- 



IMPRESSION OF p’eNG TEH-HUAI 289 

tung, P’eng Teh-huai ordered that these be preserved. They 
were printed on only one side, and there was a paper short- 
age in the Red Army. The blank side of these handbills was; 
used later for printing Red Army propaganda. 

P’eng was very fond of children, I noticed, and he was 
often followed by a group of them. Many of these young- 
sters, who act as mess-boys, buglers, orderlies, and grooms, 
are organized as regular units of the Red Army, in groups 
called the Shao-nien Hsien-feng-tui, or Young Vanguards. 
I often saw P’eng seated with two or three “little Red dev- 
ils,” seriously talking to them about politics or their personal 
troubles. He treated them with great dignity. 

One day I went with P’eng and part of his staff to visit 
a small arsenal near the front, and to inspect the workers’ 
recreation room, their own Lieh-nmg 'Pang, or Lenin Club. 
There was a big cartoon, drawn by the workers, on one side 
of the room. It showed a kimonoed Japanese with his feet on 
Manchuria, Jehol and Hopei, and an upraised sword, drip- 
ping with blood, poised over the rest of China. The carica- 
tured Japanese had an enormous nose. 

“Who is that?” P’eng asked a Young Vanguard whose 
duty it was to look after the Lenin Club. 

■ “That,” replied the lad, “is a Japanese imperialist!” 

“How do you know?” P’eng demanded. 

“Just look at his big nose!” was the response. 

P’eng laughed and looked at me. “Well,” he said, indicat- 
ing me, “here is a yang kiiei-tzii [foreign devil], is he an 
imperialist?” 

“He is a foreign devil all right,” the Vanguard replied, 
“but not a Japanese imperialist. He has a big nose, but it 
isn’t big enough for a Japanese imperialist!” 

P’eng shouted in delight, and thereafter jokingly called 
me ta pi'-tzu, the Big Nose. As a matter of fact my proboscis 
is regular and inoffensive enough in Occidental society, but 
to Chinese all foreigners are ta pi-tzii. I pointed out to P’eng 



290 WITH THE RED ARMY 

that such cartoons might result in serious disillusionment 
when the Reds actually came into contact with the Japanese 
and found Japanese noses quite as reasonable as their own. 
They might not recognize the enemy and refuse to fight. 

“Don’t worry!” said the commander, “we will know a 
Japanese, whether he has a nose or riot!” 

Once I went to a performance of the First Army Corps’ 
Anti-Japanese Theatre with Peng, and we sat down with 
the other soldiers on the turf below the improvised stage. 
He seemed to enjoy the plays immensely, and he led a de- 
mand for a favourite song. It grew quite chilly after dark, 
although it was still late August. I wrapped my padded coat 
closer to me. In the middle of the performance I suddenly 
noticed with surprise that P’eng had removed his own coat. 
Then I saw that he had put it round a little bugler sitting 
next to him, 

I understood P’eng’s affection for these “little devils” 
later on, tvhen he yielded to persuasion one night and told 
me something of his childhood. The trials of his own youth 
may amaze an Occidental ear, but they are typical enough 
of background events which explain many of the young 
Chinese who “See Red” today. 





Why Is a Red? 



P ’ENG TEH-HUAI was born in a village of Flsiang T’an 
hsien, about 90 U from Changsha, beside the blue- 
fiiAving Hsiang River, and in a wealthy farming community. 



WHY IS A RED? 29 1 

Hsiang T’an is one of the prettiest parts of Hunan — a green 
countryside quilted with deep rice-lands and thickets of tall 
bamboo. It is densely populated. More than a million people 
live in this one county. Though the soil of Hsiang T’an is 
rich, the majority of the peasants are miserably poor, illit- 
erate and “little better than serfs,” according to P’eng. Land- 
lords are all-powerful there, own the finest lands, and charge 
exorbitant rents and taxes, for they are in many cases also 
the officials. 

Several great landlords in Hsiang T’an have incomes of 
from forty to fifty thousand tan of rice annually, and some 
of the wealthiest grain merchants in the province live there. 

P’eng’s own family were rich peasants. His mother died 
when he was six, his father remarried, and this second wife 
hated P’eng because he was a constant reminder of her pred- 
ecessor. She sent him to an old-style Chinese school, where 
‘the teacher frequently beat him. P’eng was apparently quite 
capable of looking after his own interests: in the midst of 
one of these beatings he picked up a stool, scored a hit, and 
fled. The teacher brought a lawsuit against him in the local 
courts, and his stepmother denounced him. 

His father was rather indifferent in this quarrel, but to 
keep peace with his wife he sent the young stool-tosser off 
to live with an aunt, whom he liked. She put the boy into a 
so-called modern school. There he met a “radical” teacher, 
who did not believe in filial worship. One day, when Teh- 
huai was playing in the park, this teacher came along and sat 
down to talk with him. P’eng asked whether he worshipped 
his parents, and whether he thought P’eng should worship 
his. As for himself, said the teacher, he did not believe in 
such nonsense. Children were brought into the world while 
their parents were playing, just as Teh-huai had been play- 
ing in this park. 

“I liked this notion,” said P’eng, “and I mentioned it to 
my aunt u'hen I went home. She was horrified, and the very 



292 WITH THE RED ARMY 

next day had me withdra’wai from the evil ‘foi'eign influ- 
ence.’ ” Hearing something of the young man’s objection to 
filial worship, his grandmother, who seems to have been a 
rather blood-thirsty old t)'Tant, began to pray regularly “on 
the first and fifteenth of each month, and at festivals, or 
when it stormed,” for heaven to strike this unfilial child and 
destroy him. 

And then occurred an amazing thing, which can best be 
told in P’eng’s own words: 

“My grandmother regarded us all as her slaves. She was 
a heavy smoker of opium. I hated the smell of it, and one 
night, when I could stand it no longer, I got. up and kicked 
a pan of her opium from the stove. She was furious. She 
called a meeting of the whole clan, and formally demanded 
my death by drowning, because I was an unfilial child. She 
made a long list of charges against me. 

“The whole clan was about ready to carry out her de- • 
mand. My stepmother agreed that I should die, and. my 
father said that since it was the family will he would not 
object. Then an uncle, my own mother’s brother, stepped 
forward and he bitterly attacked my patents for their fail- 
ure to educate me properly. He said that it was their fault 
and that in this case no child could be held responsible. 

“My life was spared, but I had to leave home. I was nine 
years old, it was cold October, and I owned nothing but my 
coat and trousers. My stepmother tried to take those from 
me, but I proved that they did not belong to her, but had 
been given to me by my own mother.” 

Such was the beginning of P’eng Teh-huai’s life in the 
great world. He got a job first as a cowherd, and next as a 
coal-miner, where he pulled a bellows for fourteen hours a 
day. W eary of these long hours he fled from the mine to be- 
come a shoemaker’s apprentice, working only tv'elve liours 
a day, a big improvement. He received no salary, and after 
eight months he ran away again, this time to work in a 



WHY rs A RED? 293 

sodium-mine. The mine closed; he was forced to seek work 
once more. Still owning nothing but the rags on his back, he 
became a dyke-builder. Here he had a “good job,” actually 
received wages, and in two years had saved 1,500 cash — 
about $12! But he “lost ever)'-thing” when a change of war- 
lords rendered the currency worthless. Very depressed, he 
decided to return to his native district. 

Now sixteen, P’eng went to call on a rich uncle — the 
uncle who had saved his life. This man’s own son had just 
died; he had always liked Teh-huai, and he welcomed him 
and offered him a home. Here P’eng fell in love with his own 
cousin, and the uncle was favourably disposed to a betrothal. 
They studied under a Chinese tutor, played together, and 
planned their future. 

These plans were interrupted by P'eng’s irrepressible im- 
petuosity. Next year there u^as a big rice famine in Hunan, 
and thousands of peasants were destitute. P’eng’s uncle 
helped many, but the biggest stores of rice were held by a 
great landlord-merchant, who fabulously profiteered. One 
day a crowd of over 200 peasants gathered at his house, de- 
manding that the merchant sell them rice Avithout profit — 
traditionally expected of a virtuous man in time of famine. 
The rich man refused to discuss it, had the people driven 
away, and barred his gates. 

P’eng went on: “I was passing his place, and paused to 
watch the demonstration. I saw that many of the men were 
half starved, and I kneu^ this man had over 10,000 tan of rice 
in his bins, and that he had refused to help the starving at all. 
I became infuriated, and led the peasants to attack and in- 
vade his house. They carted off most of his stores. Thinking 
of it afterwards, I did not know exactly why I had done 
that. I only knew that he should have sold rice to the poor, 
and that it \vas right for them to take it from him if he 
did not.” 

P’eng had to flee once more for his life, and this time he 



294 WITH THE RED ARMY 

was old enough to join the Army. His career as a soldier be- 
gan. Not long afterwards he was to become a revolutionary. 

At eighteen he was made a platoon commander and was 
involved in a plot to overthrow the ruling governor — 
Tuchiin Hu. P’eng had been deeply influenced by a student 
leader in his army, whom the tiichim had killed. Entrusted 
with the task of assassinating Hu, he entered Changsha, 
waited for him to pass down the street one day, and threw 
a bomb at him. The bomb proved to be anti-climactic, like 
Chinese fiction: it failed to explode. P’eng escaped. 

Not long afterwards Dr. Sun Yat-sen became Generalis- 
simo of the allied armies of the South-west, and succeeded 
in defeating Hu, but was subsequently driven out 

of Hunan again by the northern militarists. P’eng fled with 
Sun’s army. Sent upon a mission of espionage by Ch’eng 
Ch’ien,’^ one of Sun’s commanders, P’eng returned to Chang- 
sha, v'as betrayed, and arrested. Chang Ching-yao \vas then 
in power in Hunan. P’eng described his experiences: 

“I was tortured every day for about an hour in many 
different ways. One night my feet were bound and my 
hands were tied behind my back. I was hung from the roof 
with a rope round my wrists. Then big stones were piled on 
my back, while the gaolers stood round kicking me and 
demanding that I confess — for they still had no evidence 
against me. Many times I fainted. 

“This torture went on for about a month. I used to think 
after every torture that next time I would confess, as I could 
not stand it. But each time I decided that I would not give 
up till the next day. In the end they got nothing from me, 
and to my surprise I was finally released. One of the deep 
satisfactions of my life came some years later when ^ye (the 
Red Army) captured Changsha and destroyed that old tor- 
ture-chamber. We released several hundred political prison- 
^ Lin Pai-chu was chief-of -staff of Ch’eng Ch’icn’s army. 



WHY IS A RED? 295 

ers there — ^many of them half-dead from beatings, fiendish 
treatment and starvation.” 

When P’eng regained his freedom he went back to his 
■uncle’s home, to visit his cousin. He intended to marry her, 
as he still considered himself betrothed. He found that she 
had died. Re-enlisting in the Army, he soon afterwards re- 
ceived his first commission and was sent to the Hunan mili- 
tary school. Following his graduation he became a battalion 
commander in the 2nd Division, under Lu Ti-p’ing, and was 
assigned to duty in his native district. 

“My uncle died and, hearing of it, I arranged to return to 
attend the funeral. On the way there I had to pass my child- 
hood home. My old grandmother was alive, now past eighty, 
and still very active. Learning that I was returning, she 
Y'alked down the road 10 li to meet me, and begged my for- 
giveness for the past. She was very humble and very respect- 
ful. I was quite surprised by this change. What could be the 
cause of it? Then I reflected that it was not due to any 
change in her personal feeling, but to my rise in the world 
from a social outcast to an army officer with a salary of §200 
a month. I gave the old lady a little money, and she sang my 
praises in the family as a model ‘filial son’!” 

I asked P’eng what reading had influenced him. He said 
that when as a youth he read Ssu A'la-kuang’s Sze Chib Chien 
(or History of Governing), he began for the first time to 
have some serious thoughts concerning the responsibility of 
a soldier to society. “The battles by Ssu iMa-kuang were 
completely pointless, and only caused suffering to the people 
— ver)'- much like those that were being fought beuveen the 
militarists in China in my own time. What could we do to 
give purpose to our struggles, and bring about a permanent 
change?” 

P’eng read Liang Ch’i-ch’ao and K’ang Yu-wei and many 
of the writers who had influenced Mao Tse-tung. For a time 



296 WITH THE RED ARAIY 

he had some interest in anarchism. In Ch’en Tu-hsiu’s New 
Youth he learned of Socialism, and from that point he began 
to study Marxism. The Nationalist Rev^olution was forming, 
he was a regimental commander, and he felt the necessity of 
a political doctrine to give morale to his troops. Sun Yat- 
sen’s San Min Chic I “was an improvement over Liang Ch’i- 
ch’ao,” but P’eng felt that it was “too vague and confused,” 
although he was by then a member of the Kuomintang. Buk- 
harin’s A B C of Commimisin seemed to him “for the first 
time a book that presented a practicable and reasonable form 
of society and government.” 

By 1926, P’eng had read the Communist Manifesto, an 
outline of Capital, A New’ Conception of Society (by a lead- 
ing Chinese Communist), Kautsky’s Class Struggle, and 
many articles and pamphlets giving a materialist interpreta- . 
don of the Chinese Revolution. “Formerly,” said P’eng, “I 
had been merely dissatisfied with society, but saw little 
chance of making any fundamental improvement. After 
reading the Communist Manifesto I dropped my pessimism 
and began working v/ith a new conviction that society could 
be changed.” 

Although P’eng did not join the Communist Party until 
1927, he enlisted the aid of Communist youths in his troops, 
began Marxist courses of political training, and organized 
soldiers’ committees. In 1926, he married a middle-school 
girl who was a member of the Socialist Youth, but during 
the revolution they became separated. P’eng has not seen her 
since 1928. It was in July of that year that P’eng. revolted, 
seized P’in’ ICiang, and began his long career as a rebel, or 
bandit — as you prefer. 

He had been pacing back and forth, grinning and joking 
as he told me these incidents of his youth and struggle, and 
carrying in his hand a Mongolian horse-hair fl.y-swattei', 
which lie brandished absent-mindedly for emphasis. A mes- 
senger now brought in a sheaf of radiograms, and he sud- 



TACTICS OF PARTISAN AVARFARE 297 

denly looked the serious commander again as he turned to 
read them. 

“Well, that’s about all, anj'Avay,” he concluded. “That 
explains something about how a man becomes a ‘Red- 
bandit’!” 

= 

Tactics of Partisan Warfare 

< > 

A ND here I want to tell of an extremely interesting in- 
jL\. ten'iew I had with P’eng Teh-huai on how and why 
the Red Army grew. My recollection is that we sat in the 
house of a former magistrate, in Yu Wang Pao, in a two- 
storied edifice with a balustraded porch — a porch from 
which you could look out totvards Mongolia, across the 
plains of Ninghsia. 

On the high stout walls of Yu Wang Pao a squad of Red 
buglers Avas practising, and from a corner of the fort-like 
city flevA^ a big scarlet flag, its yelloAv hammer and sickle 
cracking out in the breeze noAA'^ and then as though a fist 
Avere behind it. We could look doAvn on one side to a clean 
courtyard, Avhere Mohammedan Avomen Avere hulling rice 
and baking. Washing hung from a line on another side. In a 
distant square some Red soldiers Avere practising Avall-scal- 
ing, broad-jumping, and grenade-throAving. 

P’eng Teh-huai is a native of the same county of Hunan 
as Mao Tse-tung, though they did not meet until the Red 
Army was formed. He speaks with a pronounced southern 
dialect, and machine-gun rapidity. I could only understand 



298 WITH THE RED ARMY 

him clearly when he spoke slowly and simply, which he Y,^as 
generally too impatient to do. For this interview a yonng 
graduate of a Peiping university, whose English was excel- 
lent, acted as my interpreter. I hope he is still alive, and will 
some time read this acknowledgment of my deepest thanks 
to him. 

“The main reason for partisan warfare in China,” P’eng 
began, “is economic bankruptcy, and especially rural bank- 
ruptcy. Imperialism, landlordism, and militaristic wars have 
combined to destroy the basis of rural economy, and it can- 
not be restored without eliminating its chief enemies. Enor- 
mous taxes, together with Japanese invasion, both military 
and economic, have accelerated the rate of this peasant bank- 
ruptcy, aided by the landlords. The gentry’s exploitation of 
power in the villages makes life difficult for the majority of 
the peasants. There is widespread unemployment in the vil- 
lages. There is a readiness among the poor classes to fight for 
a change. 

“Secondly, partisan warfare has developed because of 
the backwardness of the hinterland. Lack of communica- 
tions, roads, railways and bridges makes it possible for the 
people to arm and organize. 

“Thirdly, although the strategic centres of China are all 
more or less dominated by the imperialists, this control is 
uneven and not unified. Between the imperialist spheres of 
influence there are wide gaps, and in these partisan warfare 
can quickly develop. 

“Fourthly, the Great Revolution (1925-1927) fixed the 
revolutionary idea in the minds of many, and even after the 
counter-revolution in 1927 and the killings in the cities, 
many revolutionaries refused to submit, and sought a method 
of opposition. Owing to the special system of joint impe- 
rialist-comprador control in the big cities, and" the lack of an’ 
armed force in the beginning, it was impossible to find a base 

298 



TACTICS OF PARTISAN WARFARE 299 

in urban areas, so many revolutionary workers, intellectuals 
and peasants returned to the rural districts to lead the peas- 
ant insurrections. Intolerable social and economic conditions 
had created the demand for revolution: it was only neces- 
sary to give leadership, form and objectives to this rural 
mass movement. 

“All these factors contributed to the growth and success 
of revolutionary partisan warfare. They are, of course, quite 
simply stated, and do not go into the deeper problems be- 
hind them. 

“Besides these reasons, partisan warfare has succeeded 
and partisan detachments have developed their invincibility 
because of the identity of the masses with the fighting forces. 
Red partisans are not only warriors; they are at the same 
time political propagandists and organizers. Wherever they 
go they carry the message of the revolution, patiently ex- 
plain to the mass of the peasantry the real missions of the 
Red Army, and make them understand that only through 
revolution can their needs be realized, and why the Com- 
munist Party is the onl)'- party which can lead them. 

“But, as regards the specific tasks of partisan warfare, 
you have asked why in some places it developed very rap- 
idly, and became a strong political power, while in others it 
was easily and quickly suppressed. This is an interesting 
question. 

“First of all, partisan warfare in China can only succeed 
under the revolutionary leadership of the Communist Party, 
because only the Communist Party wants to and can satisfy 
the demands of the peasantry, understands the necessity for 
deep, broad, constant political and organizational work 
among the peasantry, and can fulfil the promises of its 
propaganda. 

“Secondly, the active field leadership of partisan units 
must be determined, fearless and courageous. Without these 



500 WITH THE RED ARMY 

qualities in the leadership, partisan warfare not only cannot 
grow, but it must wither and die under the reactionary 
offensive. 

“Because the masses are interested only in the practical 
solution of their problems of livelihood, it is possible to de- 
velop partisan warfare only by the immediate satisfaction of 
their most urgent demands. This means that the exploiting 
class must be promptly disarmed and immobilized. 

“Partisans can never remain stationary; to do so is to in- 
vite destruction. They must constantly expand, building 
round themselves ever-new peripheral and" protective 
groups. Political training must accompany every phase of 
the struggle, and local leaders must be developed from every 
new group added to the revolution. Leaders from the out- 
side can be introduced to a limited extent, but no lasting 
success can be achieved if the movement fails to inspire, 
awaken and constantly create new leaders from the local 
mass.” 

These statements were interesting, they were undoubt- 
edly important. But I wanted to know the military principles 
which guide the Reds, and which have made them so diffi- 
cult an enemy for the many times more formidably equipped 
Nanking troops. People who have read much about Colonel 
Lawrence and his campaigns invariably compare Red tactics 
to those of the great English genius of guerrilla warfare. 
Like the Arabs, the Reds had given but mediocre perform- 
ances in their few big ventures at positional warfare; but, 
like the Arabs, they had proved invincible in the war of 
manoeuvre. 

One of the chief reasons %vhy Afarshal Chang Hsueh- 
liang began to respect the Reds (the enemy he had been sent 
to destroy) was because he had been impressed with their 
skill at this type of combat, and had come to believe they 
could be utilized in fighting Japan. After he had reached a 
kind of truce vdth them he invited Red instructors to teach 



TACTICS OF PARTISAN WARFARE 3OI 

in the new officers’ training school opened for his Man- 
churian army in Shensi, and here the Communist influence 
rapidly developed. Marshal Chang and most of his officers, 
bitterly anti-Japanese, had become convinced that it was 
superior mobility and manceuvring ability on which China 
would ultimately have to depend in a war with Japan. They 
were anxious to know all that the Reds had learned about 
the tactics and strategy of manoeuvring warfare during ten 
years of fighting experience. 

Concerning these points I had questioned P’eng. Was it 
possible, I had asked him, to summarize the “principles of 
Red partisan warfare”? He had promised to do so and had 
written down a few notes from which he now read. For a 
fuller discussion of the subject he referred me to a small 
book written by Mao Tse-tung and published in the Soviet 
districts; but this I was unable to get. 

“There are certain rules of tactics which must be fol- 
lowed,” P’eng explained, “if the newly developing partisan 
army is to be successful. These we have learned from our 
long experience, and though they are variable, according to 
conditions, I believe that departures from them generally 
lead to extinction. The main principles can be summarized 
under ten points, like this: 

“First, partisans must not fight any losing battles. Unless 
there are strong indications* of success, they should refuse 
any engagement. 

“Second, surprise is the main offensive tactic of the well- 
led partisan group. Static warfare must be avoided. The par- 
tisan brigade has no auxiliary force, no rear, no line of sup- 
plies and communications except that of the enemy. In a 
lengthy positional Avar the enemy has every advantage, and 
in general the chances of partisan success diminish in pro- 
portion to the duration of the battle. 

“Third, a careful and detailed plan of attack, and espe- 
cially of retreat, must be worked out before any engagement 



302 WITH THE RED ARMY 

is offered or accepted. Any attack undertaken without full 
knowledge of the particular situation opens the partisans to 
outmanoeuvre by the enemy. Superior manoeuvring ability is 
a great advantage of the partisans, and errors in its manipu- 
lation mean extinction. 

“Fourth, in the development of partisan warfare the 
greatest attention must be paid to the min-thian^ the first, 
la.st, and most determined line of resistance of the landlords 
and gentry. The min-thian must be destroyed militarily, but 
must, if at all possible, be won over politically on the side of 
the masses. Unless the min-thian in a district is disarmed it is 
impossible to mobilize the masses. 

“Fifth, in a regular engagement with enemy troops the 
partisans must exceed the enemy in numbers. But if the en,- 
emy’s regular troops are moving, resting, or poorly guarded, 
a swift, determined, surprise flank-attack on an organically 
vital spot of the enemy’s line can be made by a much smaller 
group. Many a Red ‘short-attack’ has been carried out with 
only a few hundred men against an enemy of thousands. 
Surprise, speed, courage, unwavering decision, flawlessly 
planned manoeuvre, and the selection of the most vulnerable 
and vital spot in the enemy’s ‘anatomy,’ are absolutely essen- 
tial to the complete victory of this kind of attack. Only a 
highly experienced partisan army can succeed at it. 

“Sixth, in actual combat, the partisan line must have the 
greatest elasticity. Once it becomes obvious that their cal- 
culation of enemy strength or preparedness or fighting 
power is in error, the partisans should be able to disengage 
and withdraw with the same speed as they began the attack. 
Reliable cadres must be developed in every unit, fully ca- 
pable of replacing any commander eliminated in battle. Re- 

* P’cng Tch-huai estimated that the mm-fuav number at least 3,- 
000,000 men (in addition to Oiina’s huge regular army of 1,000,000 
men). 



TACTICS OF PARTISAN WARFARE 3O3 

sourcefulness of subalterns must be greatly relied upon in 
partisan warfare. 

“Seventh, the tactics of distraction, decoy, diversion, 
ambush, feint, and irritation must be mastered. In Chinese 
these tactics are called ‘the principle of pretending to attack 
the east while attacking the west.’ 

“Eighth, partisans must avoid engagements with the main 
force of the enemy, concentrating on the weakest link, or 
the most vital. 

“Ninth, every precaution must be taken to prevent the 
enemy from locating the partisans’ main forces. For this rea- 
son, partisans should avoid concentrating in one place when 
the enemy is advancing, and should change their position 
frequently — two or three times in one day or night, just 
before an attack. Secrecy in the movements of the partisans 
is absolutely essential to success. Well-worked-out plans for 
dispersal after an attack are as important as plans for the 
actual concentration to meet an enemy advance. 

“Tenth, besides superior mobility, the partisans, being 
inseparable from the local mass, have the advantage of supe- 
rior intelligence, and the greatest use must be made of this. 
Ideally, every peasant should be on the partisans’ intelligence 
staff, so that it is impossible for the enemy to take a step 
without the partisans knowing of it. Great care should be 
taken to protect the channels of information about the en- 
emy, and several auxiliary lines of intelligence should always 
be established.” 

These were the main principles, according to Com- 
mander P’eng, on which the Red Army had built up its 
strength, and it was necessary to employ them in every en- 
largement of Red territory. He finished up: 

“So you see that successful partisan warfare demands 
these fundamentals: fearlessness, swiftness, intelligent plan- 
ning, mobility, secrecy, and suddenness and determination 



304 WITH THE RED ARMY 

in action. Lacking any of these, it is difficult for partisans to 
win victories. If in the beginning of a battle they lack quick 
decision, the battle will lengthen. They must be swift, other- 
wise the enemy will be reinforced. They must be mobile 
and elastic, otherwise they will lose their advantages of ma- 
noevre. 

“Finally, it is absolutely necessary for the partisans to 
win the support and participation of the peasant masses. If 
there is no movement of the armed peasantry, in fact, there 
is no partisan base, and the army cannot exist. Only by im- 
planting itself deeply in the hearts of the people, only by 
fulfilling the demands of the masses, only by consolidating 
a base in the peasant Soviets, and only by sheltering in the 
shadow of the masses, can partisan warfare bring revolu- 
tionary victory.” 

P’eng had been pacing up and down the balcony, deliv- 
ering one of his points each time he returned to the table 
where I sat writing. Now he suddenly stopped, and stood 
thoughtfully reflecting. 

“But nothing, absolutely nothing,” he said, “is more im- 
portant than this — that the Red Army is a people’s army, 
and has grown because the people helped us. 

“I remember the winter of 1928, when my forces in 
Hunan had dwindled to a little over two thousand men, and 
we were surrounded. The Kuomintang troops burned down 
all the houses in a surrounding area of about 300 li, seized all 
the food there, and then blockaded us. We had no cloth, we 
used bark to make short tunics, and we cut up the legs of 
our trousers to make shoes. Our hair grew long, we had no 
quarters, no lights, no salt. We were sick and half starved. 
The peasants were no better off, and we would not touch 
what little they had. 

“But the peasants encouraged us. They dug up from the 
ground the grain which they had hidden from the White 
troops, and gave it to us, and they ate potatoes and wild 



3o6 with the red army 

quarter or umbrella-truces given by either side. Those ten 
years of strife in China have, if nothing else, created the nu- 
cleus of a fighting force and military brains experienced in 
the use of modern technique and tactics, which will before 
long build a powerful army that can no longer be dismissed 
as a tin-soldier affair. 

The trouble has never been with the human\ material it- 
self. The Chinese can fight as well as any people, as I learned 
during the Shanghai War in 1932. Technical limitations dis- 
regarded, the trouble has been entirely the inability of the 
command to train that human material at its disposal and 
give to it military discipline, political morale, and the will to 
victory. Therein lay the superiority of the Red Army. It was 
so often the only side in a battle that believed it was,fighting 
for something. It was the Reds’ greater success at the educa- 
tive tasks in the building of an army that enabled them to 
withstand the tremendous technical and numerical superi-, 
ority of their enemy. 

For sheer dogged endurance, and , ability to stand hard- 
ship without complaint, the Chinese peasants, who com- 
posed the greater part of the Red Army, are unbeatable. 
This was shown by the Long March, in which the Reds took 
a terrific pummelling from all sides, slept in the open and 
lived on unhulled wheat for many days, but still held to- 
gether and emerged as a potent military force. It was also 
demonstrated by the rigours and impositions of daily life in 
the Red Army. There may be foreign troops that can sur- 
vive the same exposure and rough food, crude housing, and 
continuous suffering, but I have not seen them. I know 
American, British, French, Japanese, Italian and German 
troops fairly well, but only the very best, I am convinced, 
could stand up under the exhausting routine of the Red 
soldiers. 

The Red troops I saw in Ninghsia and Kansu were quar- 
tered in caves, former stables of wealthy landlords, hastily 



LIFE OF THE RED WARRIOR 307 

erected barracks of clay and wood, and in compounds and 
houses abandoned by former officials or garrison troops. 
They slept on hard k'angs, without even straw mattresses, 
and with only a cotton blanket each — yet these rooms were 
fairly neat, clean and orderly, although their floors, walls 
and ceilings were of whitCAvashed clay. They seldom had 
tables or desks, and piles of bricks or rocks served as chairs, 
most of the furniture having been destroyed or carted off 
by the enemy before his retreat. 

Every company had its own cook and commissariat. The 
Reds’ diet was extremely simple: millet and cabbage, with a 
little .mutton and sometimes pork, were an average meal, but 
they seemed to thrive on it. Coffee, tea, cake, sweets of any 
kind, or fresh vegetables were almost unknown, but also 
unmissed. Coffee tins were more valued than their contents, 
for nobody liked coffee, it tasted like medicine, but a good 
tin could be made into a serviceable canteen! Hot water was 
almost the only beverage consumed, and the drinking of 
cold water was specifically forbidden. 

The Red soldier, Avhen not fighting, had a full and busy 
day. Actually, in the North-west, as in the South, he had 
long periods of inactivity. When a new district was occu- 
pied, the Red Army settled down for a month or two to 
establish Soviets and otherwise “consolidate” it, and only 
put a small force on outpost duty. The enemy was nearly 
always on the defensive, except when one of the periodic 
big “annihilation drives” was launched, but, in the interim 
between offensives of their own or the enemy, there were 
big gaps of leisure. 

When not in the trenches or on outpost duty, the Red 
soldier observed a six-day week. Ele arose at five, and re- 
tired to a “Taps” sounded at nine. The schedule of the day 
included: an hour’s exercise immediately after rising; break- 
fast; two hours of military drill; two hours of political lec- 
tures and discussion; lunch; an hour of rest; two hours of 



3o8 with the red army 

character-study; two hours of games and sport; dinner; 
songs and group meetings and “Taps.” 

Keen competition was encouraged in broad-jumping, 
high-jumping, running, wall-scaling, rope-climbing, rope- 
skipping, grenade-throwing, and marksmanship. Watching 
the leaps of the Reds over walls, bars, and ropes, you could 
easily understand why the Chinese Press had nicknamed 
them “human monkeys,” for their agile feats at mountain- 
climbing and swift movement. Pennants were- given in 
group competitions, from the squad up to the regiment, in 
sports, military drill, political knowledge, literacy, and pub- 
lic health. I saw these banners displayed in the Lenin Clubs 
of units that had won such distinctions. 

There was a Lenin- Club for every company and for 
every regiment, and here all social and “cultural” life had its 
centre. The regimental Lenin rooms were the best in the 
unit’s quarters, but that says little; such as I saw were always 
crude, makeshift affairs, and what interest they aroused de- 
rived from the human activity in them, rather than from 
their furnishings. They all had pictures of Marx and Lenin, 
drawn by company or regimental talent. Like some of the 
Chinese pictures of Christ, they generally bore a distinctly 
Oriental appearance, with eyes like stitches, and either bulb- 
ous foreheads like an image of Confucius, or no foreheads 
at all. A^arx, whose Chinese moniker is Ma K’e-ssu, was nick- 
named by the Red soldiers “Ma Ta Hu-tzu,” or “Ma the 
Big Beard.” They seemed to have an affectionate awe for 
him. That was especially true of the Mohammedans, who 
appear to be the only people in China capable of growing 
lu.xuriant beards as well as appreciating them.' 

Another feature of the Lenin Club was a corner devoted 
to the study of military tactics, in models of clay. The Chi- 
nese are very good at this sort of thing. Miniature towns, 
mountains, forts, rivers, lakes, and bridges were constructed 
:n these corners, and toy armies battled back and forth, 



LIFE OF THE RED WARRIOR 309 

while the class studied some tactical problem giren to it. 
Thus in some places you saw the Sino-Japanese battles of 
Shanghai refought, in another the battles on the Great Wall, 
but most of the models were, of course, devoted to past bat- 
tles between the Reds and the Kuomintang. They were also 
used to explain the geographical features of the district in 
M'hich the army was stationed, to dramatize the tactics of a 
hypothetical campaign, or merely to animate the geography 
and political lessons which Red soldiers got as part of their 
military training. In a hospital company’s Lenin room I saw 
displays of clay models of various parts of the anatomy, 
showing the effects of certain diseases, illustrating body hy- 
giene, and so on. 

Another corner of the club was devoted to character- 
study, and here you could see the note-book of each warrior 
hanging on its appointed peg on the wall. There were three 
character-study groups: tliose who knew less than too char- 
acters; those who knew from loo to 300; and those who 
could read and write more than 300 characters. Tlie Reds 
had -printed their own text-books (using political propa- 
ganda as materials of study) for each of these groups. The 
political department of each company, battalion, regiment 
and army was responsible for mass education, as well as po- 
litical training. Only about 20 per cent of the First Army 
Corps, I was told, was still in the hsia-tzu class, or “blind 
men,” as the Chinese call total illiterates. 

“The principles of the Lenin Club,” it was explained to 
me by Hsia Hua, the twenty-two-year-old political director 
of the Second Division, “are quite simple. All the life and 
activity in them must be connected with the daily work and 
development of the men. It must be done by the men them- 
selves. It must be simple and easy to understand. It must 
combine recreational value with practical education about 
the immediate tasks of the army.” 

There was also a wall newspaper in every club, and a 



310 WITH THE RED ARMY 

committee of soldiers was responsible for keeping it up to 
date. It was at least much more recent than the “library” of 
the average Lenin Club. That consisted chiefly of standard 
Chinese Red Army text-books and lectures, a History of the 
Russian Revolution, miscellaneous magazines which -may 
have been smuggled in or captured from the White areas, 
and files of Chinese Soviet publications like the Red China 
Daily NewSy Party W ork, Strttggle, and others. 

The wall newspaper of a Lenin Club gave you a real in- 
sight into the soldier’s problems and a measure of his devel- 
opment. I took down full notes, in translation, of many of 
these papers. A typical one was in the Lenin Club, Second 
Compan}'-, Third Regiment, Second Division, in Yu Wang 
Pao, for September first. Its contents included daily and 
weekly notices of the Communist Party and the Communist 
Youth League; a couple of columns of crude contributions 
by the newly literate, mostly revolutionary exhortations and 
slogans; radio bulletins of Red Army victories in south 
Kansu; new songs to be learned; political news from the 
White areas; and, perhaps most interesting of all, two sec- 
tions called the red and black columns, devoted respectively 
to praise and criticism. 

“Praises” consisted of tributes to the courage, braver}% 
unselfishness, diligence or other virtues of individuals or 
groups. In the black column comrades lashed into each other 
and their officers (by name) for such things as failure to 
keep a rifle clean, slackness in study, losing a hand-grenade 
or bayonet, smoking on duty, “political backwardness,” “in- 
dividualism,” “reactionary habits,” etc. On one back column 
I saw a cook denounced for his “half-done” millet; in an- 
other a cook denounced a man for “always complaining” 
about his productions. 

Many people have been amused to hear about the Reds’ 
passion for the English game 'of table-tennis. It is bizarre, 
somehow, but every Lenin Club had in its centre a big ping- 



LIFE OF THE RED VFARRIOR 3 I I 

pong table, usually serving double duty as dining table. The 
Lenin Clubs were turned into mess halls at chow time, but 
there were always four or five “bandits,” armed with bats, 
balls and the net, urging the comrades to huriy it up; they 
wanted to get on with their game. Each company boasted 
a ping-pong champion, and I was no match for them. 

Some of the Lenin Clubs had gramophones, confiscated 
from the homes of former officials or White officers. One 
night I was entertained with a concert on a captured Ameri- 
can victrola, described as a “gift” from General Kao Kuei- 
tzu, who was then in command of a Kuomintang army 
fighting the Reds on the Shensi-Suiyuan border. General 
Kao’s records were all Chinese, with two exceptions, both 
French. One had on it the “Marseillaise” and “Tipperary.” 
The other was a French comic song, and this brought on a 
storm of laughter from the astonished listeners, who under- 
stood not a word of it. 

The Reds had many games of their own, and were con- 
stantly inventing new ones. One of these was called Shih-tzu 
Vai, or “Know Characters,” a card game which helped the 
illiterate learn his basic hieroglyphics. Another card game 
was somewhat like poker, but the high cards were marked 
“Down with Japanese Imperialism,” “Down with Land- 
lords,” “Long live the Revolution,” and “Long live the So- 
viets”! Minor cards carried slogans that changed according 
to the political and military objectives. There were many 
group games. The Communist Youth League members were 
responsible for the programme of the Lenin Clubs, and like- 
wise led mass singing every day. Many of their words, by 
the way, were sung to Christian hymns! 

All these activities keep the mass of the soldiers fairly 
busy and fairly healthy. There were no camp followers or 
prostitutes with the Red troops I saw. Opium-smoking was 
prohibited. I saw no opium or opium-pipes with the Reds on 
the road, nor in any barracks I visited. Cigarette-smoking 



^12 WITH THE RED ARMY 

was not forbidden except while on duty, but there was prop- 
aganda against it, and few Red soldiers seemed to smoke, 
most of them refusing when I offered them a fag. 

Such was the organized life of the regular Red soldiers 
behind the front. It may strike you as not so very exciting, 
perhaps, but it is rather different from the propagandists’ 
tales, from which one might gather that the Reds’ life con- 
sists of wild orgies, entertainment by naked dancers, and 
rapine before and after meals. This may be dismissed as pure 
drivel — ^and not so pure at that. The fact is that a revolution- 
ary army an^wTere is always in danger of becoming too 
puritanical, rather than the contrary. 

Some of the Reds’ ideas have now been copied — ^\vith 
much better facilities for realizing them — by Chiang Kai- 
shek’s crack “new army” and his New Life movement. But 
one thing the White armies could not copy, the Reds 
claimed, was their “revolutionary consciousness,” on which 
stood their main fortress of morale. What this was like could 
best be seen at a political session of Red troops— where you 
could hear the simple but firmly implanted credos that these 
youths fought and died for. 


4 ^ 1^2 

6 

Session in Politics 



F inding myself with an idle afternoon, I went round 
to call on Liu Hsiao, a member of the Red Army po- 
litical department, with offices in a guard-house on the city 
wall of Yu A^^ang Pao, 



SESSION IN POLITICS 


313 

I had been seeing too much of commanders and party 
leaders, and not enough of the mass of the soldiery. By now 
it was obvious that the Red commanders were loyal Marx- 
ists, and were effectively under the guidance of the Commu- 
nist Party, through its representatives in the political depart- 
ment of every unit of the Army. Of course, Mr. Trotsky 
might dispute whether they were good Marxists or bad 
Marxists, but right here I shall not split that particular hair. 
The point is that they were conscious fighters for Socialism, 
in their fashion; they knew what they wanted, and believed 
themselves to be part of a world movement. 

“Liu,” I said, “I’ve been to too many meetings of com- 
manders, and not enough of the rank and file. What about 
the ordinary soldier? How much of this anti-imperiaUsm 
and class-war business does he believe in? I’m going to one 
of their political discussions, and I want you to come with 
me. There are too many dialects round here for me to fol- 
low alone.” 

Liu was one of the most serious-minded young men I 
had met among the Reds, and one of the hardest working, 
an intensely earnest youth of twenty-five, with an aesthetic, 
intellectual face. He was extremely courteous, gentle and in- 
offensive. Yet I sensed an immense inner spiritual pride in 
him about his connection with the Red Army. He had a pure 
feeling of religious absolutism about Communism, and I be- 
lieve he would not have hesitated, on command, to shoot 
any number of “counter-revolutionaries” or “traitors.” 

I had no right to break in on his day, but I knew he had 
orders to assist me in any way possible — he had several times 
acted as my interpreter — ^so I made the most of it. I think also 
that he disliked foreigners, and, when later on he gave me a 
brief biography of himself, I could not blame him. He had 
been twice arrested and imprisoned by foreign police in his 
own country! 

Liu was an ex-student of Eastview Academy, an Ameri-^ 



314 WITH THE RED ARMY 

can missionary school in Shengchoufu, Hunan. He had been 
a devout Christian, a fundamentalist, and a good Y.M.C.A. 
man until 1926 and the Great Revolution. One day he led a 
student strike, was expelled, and disowned by his family. 
Awakened to the “imperialistic basis of missionary institu- 
tions” in China, he went to Shanghai, became active in the 
student movement there, joined the Communist Party, and 
was imprisoned by police in the Fi'ench concession. Released 
in* 1929, he rejoined his comrades, worked under the provin- 
cial committee of the Communist Party, was arrested by 
British police, put in the notorious Ward Road jail, tortured 
by electricity to extort a confession, handed over to the Chi- 
nese authorities, jailed again, and did not get his freedom till 
1931. He was then just twenty years old. Shortly afterwards 
he was sent by the Reds’ “underground railway” to the 
Fukien Soviet district, and had ever since been with the 
Red Army. 

Liu agreed to accompany me, and together we found our 
way to a Lenin Club where there u'as a political class in ses- 
sion. It was a meeting of a company in the Second Regiment 
of the Second Division, First Army Corps, and sixty-two 
were present. This was the “advanced section” of the com- 
pany; there was also a “second section.” Political education 
in the Red Army is conducted through three main groups, 
each of which is divided into the two sections mentioned. 
Each elects its soldiers’ committee, to consult with its supe- 
rior officers and send delegates to the Soviets. The three 
groups are for: company commanders and higher; squad 
commanders and the rank and file; and the service corps — 
cooks, grooms, muleteers, carriers, sweepers, and Young 
Vanguards. 

Green boughs decorated the room, and a big red paper 
star was fixed over the doortvay. Inside were the usual pic- 
tures of Marx and Lenin, and on another wall were photo- 



SESSION IN POLITICS 


315 

graphs of Ts’ai T’ing-k’ai and Chiang Kuang-nai, heroes of 
the Shanghai War. There was a big picture of the Russian 
Red Army massed in the Red Square in an October anni- 
versary demonstration — a photograph torn from a Shanghai 
magazine. Finally, there was a large lithographed photo of 
General Feng Yii-hsiang, with a slogan under it, ’’’’Hiian W o 
Shan Ho ^’ — “Give back our mountains and rivers!” — an old 
classical phrase, now revived by the anti-Japanese move- 
ment. 

The men sat on brick seats, which they had brought with 
them (you often saw these soldier students going to school 
with note-books in one hand and a brick in the other! ) and 
the class was led by the company commander and the po- 
litical commissioner, both members of the Communist Party, 
The subject, I gathered, was “Progress in the Anti-Japanese 
Movement.” A lanky, gaunt-faced youth was speaking. He 
seemed to be summarizing five years of Sino- Japanese “un- 
declared war,” and he was shouting at the top of his lungs. 
He told of the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, and his own 
experiences there, as a former soldier in the army of Marshal 
Chang Hsueh-liang. He condemned Nanking for ordering 
“non-resistance.” Then he described the Japanese invasion 
of Shanghai, Jehol, Hopei, Chahar and Suiyuan. In each case, 
he maintained, the “Kuomintang dog-party” had retreated 
without fighting. They had “given the Japanese bandits a 
fourth of our country.” 

“Why?” he demanded, intensely excited, his voice brealff- 
ing a little. “Why don’t our Chinese armies fight to save 
china? Because they don’t want to? No! We Tungpei men 
asked our officers nearly every day to lead us to the front, 
to fight back to our homeland. Every Chinese hates to be- 
come a Japanese slave! But China’s armies cannot fight be- 
cause of our mai-kuo cheng-jiC' (which means, literally, 
“sell-country government”). 



3i6 with the red army 

“But the people will fight if our Red Army leads. . . 

He ended up with a summary of the growth of the anti- 
Japanese movement in the North-west, under the Com- 
munists. 

Another arose, stood at rigid attention, his hands pressed 
closely to his sides. Liu Hsiao whispered to me that he was 
a squad leader — a corporal — ^who had made the Long March. 
“It is only the traitors who do not want to fight Japan. It is 
only the rich men, the militarists, the tax-collectors, the 
landlords and the bankers, who start the ‘co-operate-with- 
Japan’ movement, and the ‘joint-war-against-Communism’ 
slogan. They are only a handful, they are not Chinese. 

“Our peasants and workers, every one, want to fight to 
save the country. They only need to be shown a road. . . . 
Why do I know this? In our Kiangsi Soviets we had a popu- 
lation of only 3,000,000, yet we recruited volunteer partisan 
armies of 500,000 men! Our loyal Soviets enthusiastically 
supported us in the war against the traitorous White troops. 
When the Red Army is victorious over the whole country 
our partisans will number over ten millions. Let Japan dare 
to try to rob us then!” 

And much more of it. One after another they stood up to 
utter their hatred against Japan, sometimes emphasizing, 
sometimes disagreeing with a previous speaker’s remark, 
sometimes giving their, answer to a question from the discus- 
sion leaders, maldng suggestions for “broadening the anti- 
Japanese movement,” and so on. 

One youth told of the response of the people to the Red 
Army’s anti-Japanese Shansi expedition last year. “The lao- 
pai-bsing [the people] welcomed us,” he shouted. “They 
came by the hundreds to join us. They brought us tea and 
cakes on the road, as we marched. Many left their fields to 
come to join us, or cheer us. . . . They understood quite 
clearly who were the traitors and who the patriots — ^who 
want to fight Japan, and who want to sell China to Japan. 



SESSION IN POLITICS 


317 

Our problem is to awaken the whole country as we awak- 
ened the people of Shansi. ...” 

One talked about the anti-Japanese student movement in 
the White districts, another about the anti-Japanese move- 
ment in the South-west, and a Tungpei man told of the rea- 
sons why Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang’s Manchurian soldiers 
refused to fight the Reds any more. “Chinese must not fight 
Chinese, we must all unite to oppose Japanese imperialism, 
we must win back our lost homeland!” he concluded with 
terse eloquence. A fourth spoke of the A'lanchurian anti- 
Japanese volunteers, and another of the strikes of Chinese 
workers in the Japanese mills of China. 

The discussion continued for over an hour. Occasionally 
the commander or political commissar interrupted to sum- 
marize what had been said, to elaborate a point, or to add 
new information, occasionally to correct something that had 
been said. The men took brief laborious notes in their little 
note-books, and the serious task of thought furrowed their 
honest peasant faces. The whole session was crudely propa- 
gandist, and exaggeration of fact did not bother them in the 
least. It was self-proselytizing in a way, with materials se- 
lected to prove a single thesis. But that it was potent in its 
effects was manifest. Simple but powerful convictions, logi- 
cal in shape, were forming in these young, little-tutored 
minds — credos such as every great crusading army has 
found necessary in order to stiffen itself with that spiritual 
unity, that courage, and that readiness to die in a cause, 
which we call morale. 

At last I interrupted to ask some questions. They were 
answeted by a show of hands. I discovered that of the sixty- 
two present, nine were from urban working-class families, 
M'hile the rest were peasants, straight from the land. Twenty- 
one were former Mfiiite soldiers, and six were from the old 
Manchurian Army. Only eight of this group were married, 
while twenty-one were from Red families — that is, from 



3i8 with the red army 

families of poor peasants who had shared in the land redis- 
tribution under some Soviet. Thirty-four of the group were 
under twenty years of age, twenty-four were between 
twenty and twenty-five, but only four were over thirty. 

“In what way,” I asked, “is the Red Army better than 
other armies of China?” This brought half a dozen men to 
their feet at once. And here, briefly stated, are some of the 
replies of which I made notes at the time: 

“The Red Army is a revolutionary army.” 

“The Red Army is anti-Japanese.” 

“The Red Army helps the peasants.” 

“L'ving conditions in the Red Army are entirely differ- 
ent from the White Army life. Here we are all equals; in the 
White Army the soldier masses are oppressed. Here we fight 
for ourselves and the masses. The White Army fights for the 
gentry and the landlords. Officers and men live the same in 
the' Red Army. In the White Army the soldiers are treated 
like slaves.” 

“Officers of the Red Army come from our own ranks, 
and win their appointments by merit alone. White officers 
buy their jobs, or use political influence.” 

“Red soldiers are volunteers; White soldiers are con- 
scripted.” 

“Capitalist armies are for preserving the capitalist class. 
The Red Army fights for the proletariat.” 

“The militarists’ armies’ work is to collect taxes and 
.squeeze the blood of the people. The Red Army fights to 
free the people.” 

“The masses hate the White Army; they love the Red 
Army.” 

“But how,” I interrupted once more, “do you know the 
peasants really like the Red Army?” Again several jumped 
up to answer. The political commissar recognized one. 

“When we go into a new district,” he said, “the peasants 



SESSION IN POLITICS 319 

always volunteer to help our hospital service. They carry 
our wounded back to our hospitals, from the front.” 

Another: “On our Long March through Szechuan the 
peasants brought us grass shoes, made by themselves, and 
they brought us tea and hot water, along the road.” 

A third: “When I fought in Liu Tzu-tan’s 26th Army, in 
Tingpien, we were a small detachment defending a lonely 
outpost against the Kuomintang general, Kao Kuei-tzu. The 
peasants brought us food and water. We did not have to use 
our men to bring supplies, the people helped us. Kao Kuei- 
tzu’s men were defeated. We captured some and they told 
us they had had no water for almost two days. The peasants 
had poisoned the wells and run away.” 

A Kansu peasant-soldier: “The people help us in many 
ways. During battles they often disarm small parties of the 
enemy, cut their telephone and telegraph wires, and send us 
news about the movements of the White troops. But they 
never cut our telephone lines; they help us put them up!” 

Another; “When an enemy aeroplane crashed against a 
mountain in Shensi recently, nobody saw it but a few farm- 
ers. They were armed only with spears and spades, but they 
attacked the aeroplane, disarmed the two aviators, arrested 
them, and brought them to us in Wa Ya Pao!” 

Still another: “Last April, in Yen Ch’ang\ five villages 
formed Soviets, where I was stationed. Afterwards we were 
attacked by T’ang En-p’o, and had to retreat. The min-thum 
returned, arrested eighteen villagers, and cut off their heads. 
Then we counter-attacked. The villagers led us by a secret 
mountain path to attack the min-thian. We took them by 
surprise, and we attacked and disarmed three platoons.” 

Then one youth with a long scar on his cheek got up 
and told of some experiences on the Long March. “When 
the Red Army was passing through Kweichow,” he said, 
“I was wounded with some other comrades, near Tsunyi. 
The army had to move on; it could not take us along. The 



320 WITH THE RED ARMY 

doctors bandaged us, and left us with some peasants, asking 
them to look after us. They fed us and treated us well, and 
when the White troops came to that village they hid us. In 
a few weeks we recovered. Later on, the Red Army re- 
turned to that district and captured Tsunyi a second time. 
We rejoined the army, and some of the young men of the 
villages went with us.” 

Another: “Once we were staying in a village of An Ting 
[north Shensi] and we were only a dozen men and rifles. 
The peasants there made bean curd for us, and gave us a 
sheep. We had a feast and we ate too much and went to 
sleep, leaving only one sentry on guard. He went to sleep 
too. But in the middle of the night a peasant boy arrived 
and woke us up. He had run ten li from — [some mountain] 
to warn us that mm-t'iian were there and intended to sur- 
round us. The viin-t'iuin did attack us about an hour later, 
but we were ready for them and drove them off.” 

A bright-eyed lad without a shadow of whisker on his 
face arose and declared; “I have only this to say. When the 
White Army comes to a village in Kansu, nobody helps it, 
nobody gives it any food, and nobody wants to join. When 
the Red Army comes, the peasants organize, and form com- 
mittees to help us, and young men volunteer to join. Our 
Red Army is the people, and this is what I have to say!” 

Every youth there seemed to have a personal experience 
to relate to prove that “the peasants like us.” I see from my 
notes that I wrote down seventeen different answers to that 
question. It proved so popular that another hour had passed 
before I realized that these warriors had been delayed long 
past their dinner call. I apologized, and prepared to leave, 
but one “small devil” attached to the company stood up and 
said: “Don’t worry about ceremony. We Reds don’t care 
about going without food when we are fighting, and we 
don’t care about missing our food when we can tell a foreign 
friend about our Red Army!” 



SESSION IN POLITICS 32 I 

It was a nice speech, and probably the hsiao-kiiei meant 
every word of it. But it did not in the least interfere with 
his putting away at terrific speed an enormous bowl of 
steaming millet which, a few minutes later, I saw served to 
him in the company mess. 




PART NINE: WITH THE RED ARMY 

{Continued) 

1 

Hsu Hai-tung, the Red Potter 

4 

O NE morning I went to P’eng Teh-huai’s headquarters, 
and found several members of his staff there, just fin- 
ishing up a conference. They invited me in, and opened a 
watermelon. As we sat round tables, wickedly spitting out 
seeds on the k’ang, I noticed a young commander I had not 
seen before. 

P’eng Teh-huai saw me looking at him, and he said ban- 
teringiy: “That’s a famous Red-bandit over there. Do you 
recognize him? ” The new arrival promptly grinned, blushed 
crimson, and in a most disarming way exposed a big cavern 
where two front teeth should have been. It gave him a child- 
ish and impish appearance, and everybody smiled. 

“He is the man you have been anxious to meet,” supplied 
P’eng. “He wants you to visit his army. His name is Hsu 
Hai-tung.” 

Now, of all the Red military leaders of China, probably 
none was more “notorious,” and certainly none was more of 
' a mystery, than Hsu Hai-tung. Scarcely anything was 
known of him to the outside world except that he once 
worked in a Hupeh pottery. Chiang Kai-shek had branded 
him a scourge of civilization. Recently Nanking aeroplanes 
had visited the Red lines, to drop leaflets containing, among 



324 WITH THE RED ARMY 

Other inducements to deserters (including $100 to every Red 
soldier who brought his rifle with him to the Kuomintang), 
the following promise: 

“Kill Mao Tse-tung or Hsu Hai-tung and we will give 
you $100,000 when you join our army. Kill any other ban- 
dit leader and we will reward you accordingly.” 

And here, poised shyly over a pair of square boyish shoul- 
ders, sat that head which Nanking apparently valued no 
less than P’eng Teh-huai’s. 

I acknowledged the pleasure, wondering what it felt 
like to ha TO a life worth that much to any one of your 
subordinates, and asked Hsu whether he was really serious 
about the invitation to visit his army. He was commander 
of the 15th Red Army Corps, with headquarters then lo- 
cated about 80 li to the North-west, in a town called Yu- 
wang Hsien. 

“I already have a room arranged for you in the bell- 
tower,” he responded. “Just let me know when you want 
to come, and I’ll send an escort for you.” 

We made it a bargain on the spot. 

Thus it happened that a few days later, carrying a bor- 
rowed automatic (a “confiscation” of my own from a Red 
officer), I set out for Yuwang Hsien, accompanied by ten 
Red troopers, armed with rifles and Mausers — for in places 
our road skirted Red positions only a short distance behind 
the front lines. In contrast with the eternal hills and valleys 
of Shensi and Kansu, the road we followed — a road that led 
to the Great Wall, and the lonely, beautiful grasslands of In- 
ner Mongolia — crossed high tablelands, striped with long 
green meadows, and dotted with tall bunch-grass and softly 
rounded hills, on which great herds of sheep and goats 
grazed. Eagles and buzzards sometimes flew overhead. Once 
a herd of wild gazelles came near us, sniffed the air, and 



HSU HAI-TUNG, THE RED POTTER 325 

then swooped off with incredible speed and grace, round a 
protecting mountain-side. 

In five hohrs we reached Yuwang Hsien, an ancient 
Mohammedan city of four or five hundred families, with a 
magnificent wall of stone and brick. Outside the city was a 
. Mohammedan temple, with its own walls of beautiful glazed 
brick quite unscarred. But other buildings showed signs of 
the siege this city underwent before it was taken by the 
Reds. A two-storeyed building that had been the magis- 
trate’s headquarters was partly ruined, and its fagade was 
pitted with bullet-holes. I was told that this and other build- 
ings on the outskirts had been destroyed by the defending 
troops of General Ma Hung-kuei, when the Red siege had 
first begun. The enemy had withdrawn from all extramural 
buildings, after setting fire to them, to prevent the Reds 
occupying them as positions of attack against the city walls. 

“Actually, when the city fell,” Hsu Hai-tung told me 
later on, “there was only a very minor battle. We sur- 
rounded and blockaded Yuwang Hsien for ten days. Inside 
there was one brigade of Ma Hung-kuei’s cavalry, and about 
1,000 min-thian. We made no attack at all until the tenth 
night. It was very dark. We put a ladder on the wall, a com- 
pany scaled it before the enemy guards discovered it, and 
then they defended the ladder with a machine-gun, while 
a regiment of our troops mounted the wall. 

“There was little fighting. Before dawn we had disarmed 
all the min-fuan and surrounded the brigade of cavalry. 
Only one of our men was killed, and only seven were 
wounded. We gave the viin-t’iuni a dollar apiece and sent 
them back to their farms, and we gave Ma’s men two dol- 
lars each. Several hundred of them stayed and enlisted with 
us. The magistrate and the brigade commander escaped over 
the east wall while their troops were being disarmed.” 

I spent five days with the 15th Army Corps, and found 
every waking hour intensely interesting. And of it all noth- 



326 WITH THE RED ARMY 

ing was better material for an “investigator of the Soviet 
regions,” as I was labelled in Yuwang Hsien, than the story 
of Hsu Hai-tung himself. 1 talked with him every night 
when his duties were finished, I rode with him to the front 
lines of the 73rd Division, and I went to the Red theatre 
with him. He told me for the first time the history of the , 
Honan- Anhui-Hupeh Soviet Republic, which had never 
been fully known. As organizer of the first partisan army 
of that great Red area, which was second in size only to 
the Central Soviets of Kiangsi, Hsu Hai-tung knew nearly 
every detail of its development. 

Hsu struck me as the most strongly “class-conscious” 
man — in manner, appearance, conversation, and background 
— of all the Red leaders I met. With the exception of Ho 
Lung, in fact, fie was probably the only “pure proletarian” 
among the army commanders. While the majority of the 
subordinate officers were of proletarian origin, many of the 
higher commanders were from middle-class, or middle-peas- 
ant, families, or from the intelligentsia. 

Hsu was a very obvious exception. He was quite proud 
of his proletarian origin, and he often referred to himself, 
with a grin, as a “coolie.” You could tell he sincerely be- 
lieved that the poor of China, the peasants and the workers, 
were the good people — kind, brave, unselfish, honest — ^while 
the rich had a monopoly of all the vices. It was as simple 
as that for him, I think: he was fighting to get rid of the 
vices. This absolutism of faith kept his cocky comments 
about his own- daredeviltry, and his army’s superiority, 
from sounding like vanity and conceit. When he said, “One 
Red is vmrth five Whites,” you could see that to him it was 
a statement of irrefutable fact. 

His prideful enthusiasms were a little naive, but intensely 
sincere and in them perhaps was the secret of the devotion 
his men seemed ’to have for him. He was immensely proud 
of his army — the men as individuals, their skill as soldiers, as 



HSU HAI-TUNG, THE RED POTTER 327 

horsemen, and as revolutionaries. He was proud of their 
Lenin Clubs, and their artistically made posters — ^which were 
really very good. And he was proud of his division com- 
manders, two of whom were “coolies like myself,” and one 
of whom — a Red for six years — was only nventy-one years 
old. 

Hsu valued very highly any act of physical prowess, and 
it was his regret that eight wounds he had collected in ten 
years of fighting now slightly handicapped him. But he did 
not smoke or drink, and he still had a slender, straight-limbed 
body, every inch of which seemed to be hard muscle. He 
had been wounded in each leg, in each arm, in the chest, a 
shoulder, and a hip. One bullet had entered his head just be- 
low the eye and emerged behind his ear. And yet he still 
gave you the impression ‘of a peasant youth who had but 
recently stepped out of the rice-fields, rolled down his 
trouser-legs, and joined a passing “free company” of war- 
riors. 

I found out also about the missing teeth. They had been 
lost during a riding accident. Galloping along the road one 
day, his horse’s hoof struck a soldier, and Hsu turned in the 
saddle to see whether he had been hurt. The horse shied, 
and knocked Hsu into a tree. When he regained conscious- 
ness two weeks later, it was to discover that his upper in- 
cisors had been left with the tree. 

“Aren’t you afraid you’ll be hurt some day?” I asked 
him. 

“Not much,” he laughed. “I’ve been taking beatings ever 
since I -was a child, and I’m used to it by now.” 

His childhood, in fact, explains much of why he is a 
revolutionary today. I asked him about his life — forcing 
answers from him with great difficulty, for, like all Reds, 
he only wanted to talk about battles. From the hundreds of 
words of notes I put down I select a few facts that seem 
significant. 



328 WITH THE RED ARMY ' 

Hsu Hai-tung was born in 1900 in Huangpi Hsien — 
Yellow Slope County — near Hankow. His family had for 
generations been potters, and in his grandfather’s day had 
owned land, but since then, through drought, flood, and 
taxation, had been completely proletarianized. His father 
and five brothers worked in a pottery of Huangpi, and made - 
enough to live. They were all illiterate, but ambitious for 
Hai-tung, a bright child and the youngest of the six sons, 
and they scraped together the money necessary to send him 
to school. 


“My fellow students,” Hsu told me, “were nearly all the 
sons of landlords or merchants, as few poor boys ever got 
to school. I studied at the same desks with them, but many 
hated me because I seldom had any shoes and my clothes 
were poor and ragged. I could not avoid fighting with them, 
when they cursed me. If I ran to the teacher for help, I was 
invariably beaten by him. But if the landlords’ sons got the 
worst of it, and went to the teacher, I was also beaten! 

“In my fourth year in school, when I was eleven, I got 
involved in a ‘rich-against-poor’ quarrel, and was driven to 
a corner by a crowd of ‘rich sons.’ We were throwing sticks 
and stones, and one I threw cut the head of a child named 


Huang, son of a wealthy landlord. This boy went off crying, 
and in a short time returned with his family. The elder 
Huang said that I had ‘forgotten my birth,’ and he kicked 
and beat me. The teacher then gave me a second beating. 
After that I ran away from school, and refused to return. 
The incident made a deep impression on me. I believed from 


then on that it was impossible for a poor boy to get justice.” 
Hsu became an apprentice in a pottery, where he worked 


for nothing during his “thanking-the-master years.” At six- 
teen he was a full journeyman, and the highest-paid potter 
among three hundred workers. “I can turn out a good piece 
of potter)^ as fast as anyone in China,” Hsu smilingly 



HSU HAI-TUNG, THE RED POTTER 329 

boasted, “so when the revolution is over I’ll still be a useful 
citizen!” 

He recalled an incident that did not increase his love 
for the gentry: “A travelling theatrical troupe came to our 
neighbourhood, and the workers went to see it. Wives of 
the gentry and officials were also there. Naturally the work- 
ers were curious to see what these closely guarded wives of 
the great ones looked like, and they kept staring into the 
boxes. At this, the gentry ordered the min-fuan to drive 
them out of the theatre, and there was a fight. Later on our 
factory master had to give a banquet for the offended ‘no- 
bility,’ and shoot off some fire-crackers, to compensate for 
the ‘spoiled purity’ of those women who had been gazed 
upon by the people. The master tried to take the money for 
this banquet from our wages, but we threatened to strike, 
and he changed his mind. This was my first experience of 
the power of organization as a weapon of defence for the 
poor.” 

When he was menty-one, angered by a domestic quar- 
rel, Hsu left home. He walked to Hankow, then made his 
way to Kiangsi, where he worked for a year as a potter, 
saved his money, and planned to return to Huangpi. But he 
caught cholera, and exhausted his savings while recovering. 
Ashamed to return empty-handed, he joined the army, 
'where he was promised $io a month. He received “only 
beatings.” Meanwhile the Nationalist Revolution was be- 
ginning in the South, and Communists were propagandizing 
in Hsu’s army. Several of them were beheaded, and he be- 
came interested. Disgusted with the warlord army, he de- 
serted with one of the officers, fled to Canton, and joined the 
Fourth Kuomintang Army under Chang Fa-kuei. There he 
remained till 1927. He had become a platoon commander. 

In the spring of 1927 the Nationalist forces were break- 
ing into Left-wing and Right-wing groups, and this con- 



WITH THE RED ARMY 

flict was especially sharp in Chang Fa-lcuei’s Army, which 
had reached the Yangtze River. Siding with the radicals, 
Hsu was forced to flee, and secretly he returned to Yellow 
Slope. By now he had become a Communist, having been 
much influenced by some student propagandists, and in 
Huangpi he at once began building up a local branch of the 
Party. 

The Right coup d'etat occurred in April, 1927, and Com- 
munism was driven underground. But not Hsu Hai-tung. He 
decided all by himself that the time had come for inde- 
pendent action. He had organized most of the workers in 
the potteries, and some local peasants. From these he now 
recruited the first “workers’ and peasants’ army” of Hupeh. 
They numbered in the beginning only seventeen men, and 
they had one revolver and eight bullets — Hsu’s own. 

This was the nucleus of what later became the Fourth 
Front Red Army of 60,000 men, wliich in 1933 had under 
its control a Sovietized territory the size of Ireland. It had 
its own post office, credit system, mints, co-operatives, tex- 
tile factories, and in general a well-organized economy, un- 
der an elected Government. Hsu Hsiang-ch’ien, a Whampoa 
graduate and former Kuomintang officer, had become com- 
mander-in-chief, while Chang Kuo-t’ao, a returned student 
from Moscow, and one of the leaders of the Chinese cultural 
renaissance of 1917, was chairman of the Government. 

Like Kiangsi, this Hupeh-Anhui-Honan Red Republic 
withstood the first four “annihilation campaigns” launched 
by Nanking, and actually strengthened itself in the process. 
And like Kiangsi, much the same tactics and strategy, in the 
Fifth Campaign, forced the eventual “strategic retreat” of ' 
the main forces of the Fourth Front Red Army, first to 
Szechuan, and later to the North-west. 

But besides the economic blockade, daily air-bombing, 
and the construction of a network of thousands of forts 
round this Soviet area, the Nanking generals evidently pur- 



CLASS WAR IN CHINA 33 1 

sued a policy of annihilation of the civilian population of the 
Red districts. Realizing at last that the Reds’ only real base, 
was in the mass of the peasantry, they set out methodically 
to destroy the population. During the Fifth Campaign the 
anti-Red forces in Hupeh and Anhui, then numbering about 
three hundred thousand, were stiffened udth Fascist-trained 
officers, whom Chiang Kai-shek had spent a year indoc- 
trinating vdth anti-Red propaganda in his Nanchang and 
Nanking miiitar}'’ academies. The result was a civil war, the 
intensity of udiich rivalled the Fascist conquest of Spain. 

The revenge of a ruling class, once its power is threat- 
ened, seems to follow much the same barbaric forms every- 
where, regardless of race or colour. But some of the varia- 
tions in technique are instructive, and here a few pages may 
be devoted to show how it was done in China. 




2 

Class War in China 
jf: 

F or three days, several hours every afternoon and eve- 
ning, I had been asking Hsu Hai-tung and his staff 
questions of their personal histories, about their troops, of 
tire struggle of the former Hupeh-Anhui-Honan Soviet dis- 
tricts — the Oyiiwan Soviet Republic,^ as the Reds called it 
— and about their present situation in the North-west. I was 

^ Of Yii, and Wan are the historic names of Hnpch, Anhui, and 
Honan. The Beds named their provincial Soviet on the borders of 
those three provinces by combining these ancient names. 



332 WITH THE RED ARMY 

the first foreign newspaperman to interview them. They had 
no press handouts, no “story” to peddle (they would not 
have understood the expression), no pretty, formulated 
speeches, and I had to worm everything out of them by hard 
interrogation. But it was refreshing, I reflected, to get 
straight, unadorned statements in response from men un- 
tutored in the art of propagandizing the foreigner. You felt 
you could believe what they said. 

And because of that, I suppose, I sat up with sudden in- 
terest when Hsu Hai-tung answered my question. “Where 
is your family now.^” His reply was so matter-of-fact, so 
obviously uncalculated, that I could not doubt its honesty. 

“All of my clan have been killed except one brother, 
who is with the Fourth Front Army.” 

“You mean killed in fighting?” 

“Oh, no; only three of my brothers were Reds. The rest 
>of the clan were executed by Generals T’ang En-p’o and 
Sha Tou-yin. Altogether the Kuomintang officers lolled 
sixty-six members of the Hsu clan.” 

“Sixty-six!” I repeated incredulously. 

“Yes, twenty-seven of my near relatives were executed, 
and thirty-nine distant relatives — everyone in Huangpi 
Hsien named Hsu. Old and young men, women, children, 
and even babies were lolled. The Hsu clan was wiped out, 
excepting my wife and three brothers in the Red Army, and 
myself. Two of my brothers were killed in battle later on.” 

“And your wife?” 

“I don’t know what happened to her. She was captured 
when the Wliite troops occupied Huangpi Hsien in 1931. 
Afterwards I heard that she had been sold as a concubine to 
a merchant near Hankow. My brothers who escaped told 
me about that, and about the other killings. During the 
Fifth Campaign, thirteen of the Hsu clan escaped from 
Huangpi and fled to Lihsiang Hsien, but were all arrested 



CLASS WAR IN' CHINA 333 

there. The men were beheaded; the women and children 
were shot.” 

Hsu noticed the shocked look on my face and he grinned 
mirthlessly. “That was nothing unusual,” he said. “That 
happened to the clans of many Red officers, though mine 
had the biggest losses. Chiang Kai-shek had given an order 
that when my district was captured no one named Hsu 
should be left alive.” 

So it was in this manner that we began to speak of class 
revenge. Here I must admit that I would more happily skip 
over the subject entirely, for collecting atrocity tales is a 
melancholy business anywhere. Yet, in common justice to 
the Reds, something should be said about the methods used 
by their enemy to destroy them. For a decade the Kuomin- 
tang maintained a complete news blockade round the Red 
districts, and flooded the country with propaganda “Itor- 
ror” stories, attributing much of the destruction of life and 
property by its own aeroplanes and heavy artillery — of 
which the Reds had none — to the “bandits.” It cannot be an 
unhealthful thing to listen for once to what the Reds have 
to say about the Kuomintang. 

I wrote down pages and pages of notes, collected from 
Hsu and his oflicers, containing dates, places, and detailed 
accounts of outrages committed on the population by the 
Kuomintang troops fighting in the 0\fiiwan district. But I 
cannot repeat the worst crimes I heard described. Not only 
are they unprintable, but (like the daily events in Spain) 
they are likely to prove incredible to the innocent sceptic 
udio does not know the terrible depth of class hatred in class 
warfare. 

We must remember that it is nou'^ well known that in 
the Fifth Anti-Red Campaign the Nanking officers gave 
orders in many areas to exterminate the civilian population. 
This u'as held to be militarily necessary because, as the 



334 WITH THE RED ARMY 

Generalissimo remarked in one of his speeches, where 
the Soviets had been long established “it was impossible to 
tell a Red-bandit from a good citizen.” The method appears 
to have been applied with peculiar savagery in the Oyiiwan 
Republic, chiefly because some of the leading Kuomintang 
generals in charge of anti-Red operations were natives, of 
that region, sons of landlords who had lost their land to the 
Reds, and hence had an insatiable desire for revenge. The 
population in the Soviets had decreased by about 600,000 
at the end of the Fifth Campaign. 

Red tactics in Oyiiwan had depended upon mobility over 
a wide territory, and at the beginning of every “annihilation 
drive” their main forces had moved out of the Red districts, 
to engage the enemy on its own ground. They had no im- 
portant strategic bases to defend, and readily moved from 
place to place, to decoy, divert, distract, and otherwise gain 
manoeuvring advantages. This did, however, leave the pe- 
riphery of their “human base” very much exposed. But in 
the past the Kuomintang troops had not killed the farmers 
jind townsmen vdiom they found peacefully pursuing their 
tasks in Soviet areas they occupied. 

In the Fifth Campaign, as in Kiangsi, new tactics were 
adopted. Instead of engaging the Red Army in the open 
field, the Nanking troops advanced in heavily concentrated 
units, behind extensive fortifications, bit by bit penetrating 
into Red territory, systematically either annihilating or 
transporting the entire population in wide areas inside and 
outside the Red borders. They sought to make of such dis- 
tricts a desolate, uninhabited wasteland, incapable of sup- 
porting the Red troops, if they should later recapture it. 
Nanking had fully understood at last that the only Red 
bases were in the peasant population — and that such bases 
must be destroyed. 

Thousands of children were taken prisoner, and driven 
to Hankow and other cities, where they were sold into “ap- 



CLASS WAR IN CHINA 335 

prenticeships.” Thousands of young girls and women were 
transpoi’ted and sold into the factories as slave girls and as 
prostitutes. In the cities they were pawned off as “famine 
refugees,” or “orphans of people killed by the Reds.” I re- 
member hundreds of them reaching the big industrial cen- 
tres in 1934. A considerable trade grew up, with middlemen 
buying the boys and women from Kuomintang officers. It 
became a very profitable business for a while, but threatened 
to corrupt the ranks of the army. Missionaries began talking 
about it. Christian General Chiang Kai-shek was finally 
obliged to issue a stern order forbidding this “bribe-taking,” 
and ordering strict punishment for officers engaged in the 
traffic. 

“By December, 1933,” said Hsu Hai-tung, “about half of 
Oyiiwan had become a vast wasteland. Over a once rich 
country there were very few houses left standing, cattle had 
all been driven away, the fields u'ere unkept, and there tvere 
piles of bodies in nearly every'’ village that had been occupied 
liy the White troops. Four counties in Hupeh, five in An- 
hui, and three in Honan, were almost completely ruined. In- 
an area some 400 li from east to west and about 300 /;’ from 
north to south the whole population was being killed or re- 
moved. 

“During the year’s fighting we recaptured some of these 
districts from the White troops, but when we returned we 
found the fertile lands had become semi-deserts. Only a few 
old men- and women remained, and they would tell tales 
that horrified us. W e could not believe such crimes had been 
committed by Chinese against Chinese. 

“In November, 1933, we retreated from Tien Tai Shan 
and Lao Chiin Shan, Soviet districts where there M'ere then 
about 60,000 people. When we returned, two months later, 
M'e found that these peasants had been driven from their 
land, their houses had been burned, or destroyed by bomb- 
ing, and there were not more than three hundred old men 



336 WITH THE RED ARMY 

and a few sickly children in all that region. From them we 
learned what had happened. 

“As soon as the White troops had arrived the olRcers 
had begun dividing the women and girls. Those with bobbed 
hair or natural feet had been shot as Communists. Higher 
officers had looked over the others, and picked out pretty 
ones for their own, and then the lower officers had been 
given their choice. The rest had been turned over to the 
soldiers to use as prostitutes. They had been told that these 
women were ‘bandit- wives,’ and therefore they could do 
what they liked with them. 

“Many of the young men in those districts had joined 
the Red Amiy, but many of those left, and even some of 
the old men, tried to kill the White officers for these crimes. 
Those who protested were all shot as Communists. The sur- 
vivors told us that many fights had occurred among the 
Whites, who had quarrelled among themselves about the 
distribution of women. After they had despoiled these 
women and girls they were sent to the towns and cities, 
where they were sold, only the officers keeping a few pretty 
ones for concubines.” 

“Do you mean to say these were the ti'oops of the Na- 
tional Government?” I inten-upted. 

“Yes, tliey were the 13th Army Corps of General T’ang 
En-p’o, and the Third Army Corps of General Wang Chiin. 
Generals Sha Tou-yin, Liang Kuan-yin, and Sung T’ien-tsai 
were also responsible.” 

Hsu told of another district, Huangan hsien, in Hupeh, 
which the Reds recovered from General Wang Chiin in 
July, 1933: “In the town of Tsu Yun Chai, where there was 
once a sti'eet of flourishing Soviet co-operatives and a happy 
people, everjn:hing was in ruins and only a few old men were 
alive. Tliey led us out to a valley and showed us the' scattered 
bodies of seventeen young women lying half-naked in the 
sun. They had all been raped and killed. The White troops 



CLASS WAR IN CHINA 337 

had evidently been in a great hurry; they had taken the time 
to pull off only one leg of a girl’s trousers. That day we 
called a meeting, the army held a memorial service there, 
and we ail wept. 

“Not long afterwards, in iMa Cheng, we came to one of 
our former athletic fields. There in a shallow grave we found 
the bodies of twelve comrades who had been killed. Their 
skin had been stripped from them, their eyes gouged out, 
and their ears and noses cut off. We all broke into tears of 
rage at this barbaric sight. 

“In the same month, also in Huangan, our 25th Red 
Army reached Ao Kung Chai. This had once been a lively 
place, but it was now deserted. We walked outside the town 
and saw a peasant’s hut with smoke coming from it, on a 
hillside, and some of us climbed up to it, but the only occu- 
pant was an old man who had apparently gone insane. We 
walked down into the valley again until we came upon a 
long pile of dead men and women. There were more than 
^400 bodies lying there, and they had evidently been killed 
only a short time before. In some places the blood was sev- 
eral inches deep. Some women were lying with their chil- 
dren still clutched to them. Many bodies were lying one on 
top of another. 

“Suddenly I noticed one of the bodies move, and, going 

over to it, found that it was a man still alive. We found 

several more alive after that, altogether more than ten. We 

carried them back with us and treated their wounds, and 

they told us what had happened. These people had fled from 

the town to hide in this valley, and had encamped in the 

open. Afterwards the White officers had led their troops to 

the spot, ordered them to put up their machine-guns on the 

mountain-sides, and had then opened fire on the people be- 

louL They had kept firing for several hours until they 

thought everybody was dead. Then they had marched away 

again without even coming down to look at them.” 
o o 



WITH THE RED ARMY 


338 

The next day Hsu led his whole army out to that valley, 
and showed them the dead, among whom some of the sol- 
diers recognized peasants they had known, men and women 
who must have given them shelter at one time, or sold them 
melons, or traded at the co-operatives. They were deeply 
moved. Hsu said that this experience steeled his troops with 
a stubborn morale and a determination to die fighting, and 
that throughout the entire twelve months of the last great 
annihilation drive not a single man had deserted from the 
2 5 th Army. 

“Towards the end of the Fifth Campaign,” he continued, 
“nearly every house had dead in it. We used to enter a vil- 
lage that seemed empty until we looked into the ruined 
houses. Then we would find corpses in the doorways, on the 
floor, or on the k'ang, or hidden away somewhere. Even the 
dogs had fled from many villages. In those days we did not 
need spies to watch the enemy’s movements. We could fol- 
low them quite easily by the skies filled with smoke from 
burning towns and hamlets.” 

This is only a little — only a very small part — of the 
stories I heard from Hsu Hai-tung and others who fought 
through that terrible year, and finally trekked westw'^ard, not 
their army but human “base” destroyed, its hills and valleys 
stained with the blood of its youth, the living heart of it 
torn out. Later on I talked to many warriors from Oyiiwan, 
and they told tales more pitiful still. They did not like to 
talk of what they had seen; they did so only under question- 
ing, and it was clear their experiences had permanently 
marked the matrix of their minds with a class hatred in- 
eradicable for life. 

Does this mean, however, that the Reds are innocent of 
atrocity and class revenge themselves? I think not. It is true 
that during my four months with them, as far as I could 
learn from unrestricted inquiry, they executed but two 
civilians. It is also true that I did not see a single village or 



FOUR GREAT HORSES 


339 

town burned by them, or hear, from the many farmers I 
questioned, that the Reds were addicted to arson. But my 
personal experience with them starts and ends with the 
North-west: what “killing and burning” may have been 
done elsewhere I cannot affirm or deny. At the same time it 
would be naive not to suspect about 90 per cent of the anti- 
Red - propaganda published these many years in the Kuo- 
mintang and foreign press has been pure poppycock, since 
at least that much of it has lacked any reliable confirmation. 
And, to be accurate, one of the two ill-fated “counter- 
revolutionaries” mentioned above was not killed by the 
Reds, but by some Ninghsia Aioslems with a strong distaste 
for tax-collectors. Farther on it will be told in what manner 
he met his demise, but first let us see how these Aioslems 
have been ruled, and perhaps we shall understand the eco- 
nomics of the execution. 


: 

5 

Four Great Horses 

■ 

Y OU might facetiously say that Chinghai, Ninghsia, and 
northern Kansu are the prototype of that fantasia of 
Swift’s, the land of Houyhnhnm, for they are ruled as the 
satrapy of Four Great Horses whose fame is widespread in 
China. Over the areas mentioned power is divided (or was, 
before the Reds beofan edcinfr the Houyhnhnms out of con- 
siderablc portions of their domain) by a family of Aloham- 
medan generals named Ala — the Alessrs. Ala Hung-kuei, Ala 



340 WITH THE RED ARMY 

Hung-ping, Ma Pu-fang, and Ma Pu-ching. And this partic- 
ular Ma of course means horse} 

Ma Hung-kuei is governor of Ninghsia, and his cousin, 
Ma Hung-ping, former governor of the same province, is 
now ruler of a shifting fiefdom in northern Kansu. They are 
distantly related to Ma Pu-fang, many-wived son of the 
famous Mohammedan leader Ma Keh-chin. Ma Pu-fang in- 
herited his father’s toga and is now (1937) the Nanking- 
appointed Pacification Commissioner of that province, while 
his brother, Ma Pu-ching, helps out in Chinghai and in addi- 
tion exploits the great Kansu panhandle which in the west 
separates Qiinghai from Ninghsia. For a decade this distant 
country has been run like a medieval sultanate by the Ma 
family, with some assistance from an Allah of their own. 

Two of the Great Horses claim to be nobles, descendants 
of a Mohammedan aristocracy which sometimes played a ' 
decisive role in the history of China’s North-west, and, since 
something about that history is necessary background to an 
understanding of Chinese iVIohammedans today, and espe- 
cially of the Ma family itself — ^which is as numerous as the 
grasses of Ninghsia or the Smiths of the American West — 
we may pause for a moment and briefly review it. ■ 

The brothers Ma, like most Moslems in China, have 
Turkish blood in them. As early as the sixth century a race 
which we now know as the Turks had become powerful 
enough on China’s North-west frontier to make important 
demands on the monarchs of the plains.. In a couple of cen- 
turies they had built up an empire extending from eastern 
Siberia across part of Mongolia and into Central Asia. Grad- 
ually they filtered southward, and by the seventh century 
their Great Khan was received almost as an equal at the 
Court of Yang Ti, last Emperor of the Sui Dynasty. It was 

^ It is an interesting character, written thus , and deriving 
from an ancient form iri which one clearly secs its evolution 

from the original ideograph. 



FOUR GREAT HORSES 


34 > 

this same Turkish Khan who helped the half-Turkish Gen- 
eral Li Yuan overthrow the Emperor Yang Ti and establish 
the celebrated T’ang Dynasty, which for three centuries 
reigned over Eastern Asia from Ch’ang An (now Sianfu) — 
then the most cultured capital on earth. 

.Mohammedan mosques had already been built in Canton 
by seafaring Arab traders before the middle of the seventh 
century. With the advent of the tolerant T’ang power the 
religion rapidly penetrated by land routes through the 
Turks of the North-west. Mullahs, traders, embassies, and 
warriors brought ic from Persia, Arabia, and Turkestan, and 
the T’ang emperors formed close ties with the caliphates to 
the west. Especially in the ninth century, when vast hordes 
of Ouigour Turks (whose great leader Scljuk had not yet 
been born) were summoned to the aid of the T’ang Court 
to suppress rebellion, Islamism entrenched itself in China. 
Following their success, many of the Ouigours were re- 
warded with titles and great estates and settled in- the North- 
west and in Szechuan and Yunnan. 

Over a period of centuries the Mohammedans stoutly re- 
sisted Chinese absorption, but gradually lost their Turkish 
culture, adopted much that was Chinese, and became more 
or less submissive to Chinese law. Y et in the nineteenth cen- 
tury they were still powerful enough to make two great 
bids for power: one, in Yunnan, where Tu Wei-hsiu for a 
time set up a kingdom and proclaimed himself Sultan Sulei- 
man; and the last, in 1864, when Mohammedans seized con- 
trol of all the North-west and even invaded Hupeh. Tltc 
latter rebellion was put down after a campaign lasting 
eleven years. At that time of waning Manchu power the able 
Chinese General Tso Tsung-t’ang astounded the world by 
recapturing Hupeh, Shensi, Kansu, and eastern Tibet, finally 
leading his victorious army across the desert roads of Tur- 
kestan, where he re-established Chinese power on that far 
frontier in Central Asia. 



WITH THE RED ARMY 


342 

Since then no single leader has been able to unite the 
Moslems of China in a successful struggle for independence, 
but there have been sporadic uprisings against Chinese rule, 
with savage and bloody massacres on both sides. The most 
serious recent rebellion occurred in 1928, when General 
Feng Yii-hsiang was warlord of the Northwest. It was un- 
der Feng that the Wu-Ma, or “Five Ma,”^ combination ac- 
quired much of its influence and secured the nucleus of its 
present wealth and power. 

Although theoretically the Chinese consider the Hui or 
Moslem people one of the five great races" of China, most 
Chinese seem to deny Moslem racial separateness, claiming 
that they have been Sinicized. In practice, the Kuomintang 
decidedly follows out a policy of absorption, even more 
direct (though perhaps less successful) than that pursued to- 
wards the Mongolians. The Chinese official attitude towards 
the Mohammedans seems to be that they are a “religious 
minority” but not a “national minority.” However, it is 
quite evident to anyone who sees them in their own domain 
in the North-west that their claims to racial unity and the 
right to nationhood as a people are not without substantial 
basis in fact and history. 

The Mohammedans of China are said to number about 
20,000,000, and of these at least half are now concentrated 
in the provinces of Shensi, Kansu, Ninghsia, Szechuan, and 
Sinkiang. In many districts — ^particularly in Kansu and 
Chinghai — they are a majority, and in some very big areas 
they outnumber the Chinese as much as ten to one. Gen- 
erally their religious orthodoxy seems to vary according to 
their strength of numbers in a given spot, but in the domi- 
nantly Mohammedan I'egion of northern Kansu and southern 

^ Ala Chung-ying was the fifth Ala,, but has now been eliminated 
from an active role by tribal politics and international intrigue. Sven 
Hedin gives an interesting account of him in Flight of the Big Horse. 

.-These are the Han (Chinese), Alan (Alanchu), Aleng (Alongol), 
Hui (Alohammedan), and Tsang (Tibetan). 



FOUR GREAT HORSES 


343 

Ninghsia the atmosphere ' is distinctly that of an Islamic 
country. 

It may, in fact, be said that the Mohammedans are the 
largest people left in China among whom priest and bishop 
are the real arbiters of temporal as well as spiritual life, with 
religion a deciding factor in their culture, politics, and econ- 
omy. Mohammedan society revolves round the men-hiiang 
and the ahim (ameer and mullah), and their knowledge of 
the Koran and of Turkish or Arabic (scant as it usually is) 
are the mechanisrhs of magic and authority. Mohammedans 
in the North-west pray daily in the hundreds of well-kept 
mosques, observe Mohammedan feast days, fast days, and 
marriage and funeral ceremonies, reject pork, and are of- 
fended by the presence of pigs or dogs. The pilgrimage to 
Mecca is an ambition of all, and is frequently realized by 
rich men and ahuns, who thereby strengthen their political 
and economic power. To most of them Turkey, not China, 
seems to be still the fatherland, and pan-Islamism rather than 
pan-Hanism the ideal. 

Chinese influence is nevertheless very marked. Moslems 
dress like Chinese (except for round white caps or cere- 
monial fezzes worn by the men and white turbans by the 
women) and all speak Chinese as the language of daily life 
(although many know a few words from the Koran). While 
markedly Turkish features are not infrequent among them, 
the physiognomy of the majority is hardly distinguishable 
from the Chinese, with whom they have for centuries inter' 
married. Owing to their law that any Chinese who marries 
a Mohammedan must not only adopt the faith, but also be 
adopted into a Mohammedan family, cutting away from his 
or her own kinsmen, the children of these mixed marriages 
tend to grow up regarding themselves as a species quite dif- 
ferent from their Chinese relatives. 

The struggle of three sects among the Chinese Moslems 
somewhat weakened their unity, and created a convenient 



3*f4 WITH THE RED ARMY 

alignment for the Chinese Communists to work among them. 
The three sects are simply the Old, New, and Modern^ 
schools. Old and New had formed a kind of “united front” 
of their own to oppose the heretical jModern school. The 
latter nominally advocates giving up many of the cere- 
monies and customs of Mohammedanism and embracing 
“science,” but its real objectives are evidently to destroy the 
temporal power of the clergy, which the Adas find incon- 
venient, and, since it is supported by the Kuomintang, many 
Mohammedans believe its aim to be the unwelcome doctrine 
of so-called “pan-Hanism” — absorption of the national mi- 
norities by the Chinese. In the North-west the Four Adas are 
leaders of this Adodern school, and around them have 
grouped their own satellites, bureaucrats, and the wealthy 
landowners and cattle barons upon whom their regime de- 
pends. And yet the Great Horses are not precisely the men 
you would expect to lead a reform movement in religion. 

For example, consider Ada Hung-kuei, probably the rich- 
est and strongest of the quartet. He has numerous wives, is 
said to own about 6o per cent of the property of Ninghsia 
City, and has made a fortune of millions from opium, salt, 
furs, taxes, and his own paper currency. Still, he proved 
himself modern enough in one sense when he chose his fa- 
mous “picture bride.” Importing a secretary from Shanghai, 
he had him gather photographs of eligible educated beauties, 
and made his choice. The price was fixed at $50,000. Old Ma 
hired an aeroplane, flew out of the northern dust-clouds to 
Soochow, w'here he swooped up the latest addition to his 
harem — a graduate of Soochow Christian University — and 
then SAvept back again to Ninghsia like an Aladdin on his 
carpet, amid a blaze of publicity. 

But although this may seem charming enough to an Oc- 
cidental, it is doubtful whether either Ala Hung-kuei’s peas- 
^ Hshi-hsin cbiao, literally, “New-new faith.” 



FOUR GRF.AT HORSES 


345 

ants or soldiers fully appreciated the romance of it all, for 
the peasants knew where the $50,000 came from, and the 
soldiers wondered why, if the Great Horse had money to 
pay for a Christian bride, he could not pay them wages. 
When, a few months later, the Reds began their westward 
drive into Ala’s territory in’southern Ninghsia and northern 
Kansu, it was perhaps not entirely surprising that his troops 
— ^which he had boasted would annihilate the “bandits” — 
put up little fight. There were reasons. 

Here I shall not become involved in tables of statistics, 
but it is worth referrinfr to a significant article in the Gov- 
ernment bulletin of Ninghsia,* which lists the levies col- 
lected in that protdncc by General Ala. They include the 
following taxes: sales, domestic animals, camels, salt-carry- 
ing, salt-consumption, opium-lamps, sheep, merchants, por- 
ters, pigeons, land, middlemen, food, special food, additional 
land, wood, coal, skins, slaughter, boats, irrigation, mill- 
stones, houses, wood, milling, scales, ceremonies, tobacco, 
wine, stamp, marriage, and vegetables. This does not exhaust 
the inventory of petty taxes collected, but it is enough to 
suggest that people might have comparatively little to fear 
from the Reds. 

Ala Hung-kuci’s method of salt-distribution was unique. 
Salt was not only a monopoly, but every person was re- 
quired to buy half a pound per month, whether he could 
consume it or not. He was not allowed to resell; private 
trade in salt was punishable by whipping, or even death. 
Other measures against Avhich the inhabitants protasted were 
the collection of a 30-pcr-ccnt tax on the sale of a sheep, 
cow, or mule, a 25-cent tax on the ownership of a sheep, a 
dollar tax for the slaughter of a pig, and 40-cent rax on the 
sale of a bushel of wheat. 

But probably the most fiercely resented measure was 

^ Nhigbsia Kung Pao (December, 1934, Ninghsia City). 



346 WITH THE RED ARAIY 

General Ma’s conscription. He had a total of about 40,000 
troops (with Ma Hung-ping’s), and an indefinite number of 
“gate guards,” who policed the many walled towns and 
cities. Nearly all were conscripts. Every family with sons 
had to contribute, or hire a substitute, at a cost which had 
risen to about $150. The poor could borrow the sum — at 
rates from 40 per cent to 60 per cent annually — from a 
pawnshop usually owned by one of the Mas. Not only did 
the soldiers get no pay; they had to furnish their own food 
and clothing. Ma was evidently wasting no money, except 
on brides. 

Excessive taxation and indebtedness had forced many 
farmers to sell all their cattle and abandon then: lands. Great 
areas had been bought over by officials, tax-collectors, and 
lenders at very cheap rates, but much of it remained waste- 
land, because no tenants could be found to work under the 
tax-burden and rents imposed. An acceleration in the con- 
centration of land, cattle, and capital was taking place, and 
a big increase in hired farm labourers. In one districri in- 
■<^estigated it was found that over 70 per cent of the farmers 
were in debt, and about 60 per cent were living on food 
bought on credit. In the same district 5 per cent of the peo- 
ple owned from 100 to 200 77iozi of land, twenty to fifty 
camels, twenty to forty cows, five to ten horses, five to ten 
carts, and had from $1,000 to $2,000 in trading capital, while 
at the same time about 60 per cent of the population had less 
than 15 7710U of land, no livestock other than one or two 
donkeys, and an average indebtedness of $35 and 366 pounds 
of grain — much more than the average value of their land. 

Finally, it was suspected that iMa Hung-kuei was in- 
triguing for support from the Japanese against the Reds. 
A Japanese military mission had been established in Ninghsia 
City, and General Ma had given them permission to build 

^ “A Survey of Yuwang Hsien,” by Liu Hsiao, Tang-ti Kimg-Tso 
(August 3, 1936, Pao An). 



FOUR GREAT HORSES 


347 

an aerodrome north of the city, in the Alashan Mongo! ter- 
ritoryd Some of the Moslems and Mongols feared an actual 
armed Japanese invasion. 

Had the picture been otherwise when the Reds arrived, 
it is doubtful if they would have made much headway with 
the Mohammedans. Ma’s troops, however, had little interest 
in fighting, and only that 5 per cent of the people had much 
at stake in resistance. But it still remained for the Commu- 
nisfs to overcome the Moslems’ natural aversion to co-oper- 
ating with Chinese, and to offer them a suitable programme. 
This the Reds were trying hard to do, for the strategic sig- 
nificance of the Mohammedan areas was manifest. Tltey oc- 
cupied a tvide belt in the North-west which dominated the 
roads to Sinkiang and Outer jMongolia — and direct contact 
with Soviet Russia. As the Communists themselves saw it: 

“There are more than ten million Mohammedans in the 
North-west occupying an extremely important position. Our 
present mission and responsibility is to defend the North- 
west and to create an anti-Japanese base in these five prov- 
inces, so that we can more powerfully lead the anti-Japanese 
movement of the whole country and work for an immediate 
war against Japan. At the same time, in the development of 
our situation we can get into connection with the Soviet 
Union and Outer Mongolia. However, it would be impos- 
sible to carry out our mission if we failed to win over the 
Mohammedans to our sphere and to the anti-Japanese 
front.”' 

Communist work among the Mohammedans began sev- 
eral years ago in the North-west. Early in 1936, when the 

^The Japanese were later forced to abandon both their mission 
and their aerodrome. In 1937 the Mas pledged their loyalty to the 
Central Government. 

■" Company Discussion Materials: “The Mohammedan Problem,’’ 
p. 2, 1st Army Corps, Pol. Dept., June 2, 1936. 



348 , WITH THE RED ARMY 

Red Army moved across Ninghsia and Kansu towards the 
Yellow River, vanguards of young Moslems were already 
propagandizing among the Ninghsia troops, urging the over- 
throw of the “Kuomintang running-dog” and “traitor to 
Mohammedanism,” Ma Hung-kuei — and some of them los- 
ing their heads for it. These are the main promises which 
the Reds made to them; 

To abolish all surtaxes. 

To help form an autonomous Mohammedan Govetn- 
ment. 

To prohibit conscription. 

To cancel old debts and loans. 

To protect Mohammedan culture. 

To guarantee religious freedom of all sects. 

To help create and arm an anti-Japanese Mohammedan 
army. 

To help unite the Mohammedans of China, Outer Mon- 
golia, Sinkiang, and Soviet Russia. 

Here was something to appeal to nearly every Moslem. 
Even some of the ahuns saw in it an opportunity to get rid 
of Ma Hung-kuei (punishing him for burning the, mosques 
of the Old and New schools), and also a chance to realize an 
old aspiration — to re-establish direct contact with Turkey 
through Central Asia. By May, the Communists were claim- 
ing that they had achieved what sceptics had said was im- 
possible. They boasted that they had created the nucleus of 
a Chinese Moslem Red Army. 



4 

Moslem and Marxist 


^ 

O NE morning I went with an English-speaking member 
of Hsu Hai-tung’s staff to visit the Moslem training 
regiment attached to the 1 5 th Army Corps. It was quartered 
in the compound of a Moslem merchant and official — a 
thick-walled edifice with Moorish windows looldng down 
on a cobbled street through which filed donkeys, horses, 
camels, and men. 

Inside, the place was cool and neatly kept. Ever)’^ room 
had in the centre of its brick floor a place for a cistern, con- 
nected to a subterranean drain, to be used for bathing. Prop- 
,erly orthodox Moslems shower themselves five times daily, 
but, although these soldiers were still loyal to their faith and 
obviously made use of the cistern occasionally, I gathered 
that they did not believe in carrying a good thing to ex- 
tremes. Still, they easily had the cleanest habits of any sol- 
diers I had seen in China, and carefully refrained from the 
national gesture of spitting on the floor. 

The Reds had organized two training regiments of Mo- 
hammedans at the front, both recruited largely from former 
troops of Ma Hung-kuei and Ma Hung-ping. They were 
taller and more strongly built than the Chinese, heavier of 
beard, and darker-skinned, some of them very handsome in 

349 



350 WITH THE RED ARMY 

a distinct])^ Turkish way, with large black almond-shaped 
eyes and strong, sharp Caucasian features. They all carried 
the big sword of the North-west, and gave a skilful demon- 
stration of various strokes by which you can remove at one 
swift blow your enemy’s head. 

Cartoons, posters, maps, and slogans covered the walls of 
their barracks. “Down with Ma Hung-kuei!” “Abolish Ma 
Hung-kuci’s Kuomintang Government!” “Oppose Japan’s 
building of aerodromes, map-making, and invasion of 
Ninghsia!” “Realize the, independent Government of the 
Mohammedan people!” “Build our own anti-Japanese Mo- 
hammedan Red Arm3^'” Such were the exhortations which 
had attracted what Moslem following the Communists had, 
and answers given to me by Moslem soldiers concerning 
their reasons for joining the Reds centred around them as 
main issues. 

From this it may be gathered that there was some dissat- 
isfaction with General A'la Hung-kuei among his soldiers (no 
doubt somewhat exaggerated by the Reds), and this seemed 
to be shared by the Ninghsia peasants. I remember stopping 
on the road one morning to buy a melon from a Moslem 
farmer who had a whole hillside covered with them. He was 
an engaging old rustic with a jolly face, a humorous manner, 
and a really beautiful daughter — so rare an apparition in 
those parts that I stayed and bought three melons. I asked 
him if Ma Hung-kuei’s officials were really as bad as the 
Reds claimed. He threw up his hands comically in indig- 
nation, spluttering watermelon seeds between his gums. 
“Ai-ya! Ai-ya! Ai-ya!” he cried. “Ma Hung-kuei, Ma Hung- 
kuei! Taxing us to death, stealing our sons, burning and kill- 
ing! Ma-ti Ma Himg-kmir By which last expression he 
meant you could defile his mother and it would be too good 
for him. Everyone in the courtyard laughed at the old man’s 
agitation. 

The Moslem soldiers with the Reds had originally been 



MOSLEM AND MARXIST ' 35 1 

won over by subversive propaganda conducted among Ma’s 
troops, and by political lectures when they reached the Red 
camp. I asked one commander why he had joined. 

“To fight Ma Hung-kuei,” he said. “Life is too bitter for 
us Hui-mhi under Ma Hung-kuei. No family is secure. If a 
family has two sons, one of tliem must join his army. If it 
has three sons, two must join. There is no escape — unless 
you arc rich and can pay the tax for a substitute. What poor 
man can afford it? Not only that, but every man must bring 
his own clothes, and his family must pay for his food, fires, 
and lighting. This costs several tens of dollars a year.” 

Although these Red Moslem regiments had been organ- 
ized less than half a year, they had already achieved con- 
siderable “class consciousness,” it seemed. They had read, or 
heard read, the Covnmmist Manifesto, brief lessons from 
Class Struggle, and daily political lectures, a la Marxism, on 
the immediate problems of the Mohammedan people. This 
instruction was given to them, not by Chinese, but by Mo- 
hammedan members of the Communist Party — ^men who 
had been through the Reds’ Party school. Over 90 per cent 
of Ma Hung-kuei’s troops were quite illiterate, and most of 
the Moslem recruits to the Red Army had been unable to 
read at all when they joined, but they now knew a few hun- 
dred characters each, and could study the simple lessons 
given to them. Out of their two training regiments the Com- 
munists hoped to develop cadres for a big Moslem Red 
Army, to defend the autonomous Moslem republic they 
dreamed of seeing established in the North-west. Already 
nearly 25 per cent of these Moslems had joined the Com- 
munist Party. 

With the autonomy slogan the Moslem population was 
naturally in sympathy, for this has been their demand for 
many years. Whether the majority of them believed the 
Reds v^ere sincere in their promises is quite another matter. 
I doubted it. Years of maltreatment by the Chinese mili- 



352 • ' WITH THE RED ARMY 

tarists, and racial hatreds between Han and Hui (Chinese 
and Moslem), had left among them a deep and justified dis- 
trust of the motives of all Chinese, and it was unbelievable 
that the Communists had been able to break down this Mos- 
lem scepticism in so short a time. 

Such Moslems as co-operated with the Reds probably 
had reasons of their own. If Chinese offered to help them 
drive out the Kuomintang, help them create and equip an 
army of their own, help them get self-government, and help 
them despoil the rich (they no doubt said to themselves), 
they were prepared to take the opportunity — and later on 
turn that army to uses of their own, if the Reds failed to 
keep their bargain. But it was apparent from the friendliness 
of the farmers, and their readiness to organize under the 
Reds, that their programme had a distinct attraction, and that 
their careful policy- of respecting Moslem institutions had 
made an impression on even the most suspicious peasants 
and ahuns. 

Among the soldiers themselves it appeared that some of 
the historic racial animosity was being overcome, or gradu- 
ally metamorphosed into class antagonism. Thus, when I 
asked some Moslem soldiers whether they thought the Hui 
and Han peoples could co-operate under a Soviet form of 
government, one replied: 

“The Chinese and the Moslems are brothers; we Moslems 
also have Chinese blood in us; we all belong to Ta Chung 
Kuo [China], and therefore why should we fight each 
other? Our common enemies are the landlords, the capital- 
ists, the money-lenders, our oppressive rulers, and the Japa- 
nese. Our common aim is revolution.” 

“But what if the revolution interferes with your reli- 
gion?” 

“There is no interference. The Red Army does not inter- 
fere with Mohammedan worship.” 

“Well, I mean something like this. Some of the ahuns 



MOSLEM AND MARXIST 353 

[priests] are wealthy landlords and money-lenders, are they 
not? What if they oppose the Red Army? How would you 
treat them?” 

“We would persuade them to join the revolution. But 
most ahims are not rich men. They sympathize with us. One 
of our company commanders was an ahimP 

“Still, suppose some ahuns can’t be persuaded, but join 
with the Kuomintang to oppose you?” 

“We would punish them. They would be bad ahuns, and 
the people would demand their punishment.” 

Meanwhile intensive instruction was going on through- 
out the I St and 15th Army Corps to educate the soldiers to 
an understanding of the Communist Policy towards Mos- 
lems, and their effort to create a “Hui-Han United Front.” 
I attended several political sessions in which soldiers were 
discussing the “Mohammedan revolution,” and they were 
quite interesting. At one session there were long debates, es- 
pecially about the land question. Some argued that the Red 
Army should confiscate the land of great Mohammedan 
landlords; others opposed it. The political commissar then 
gave a concise statement of the Party’s position, explaining 
why it was necessary for the Mohammedans themselves to 
carry on their own land revolution, led by a strong revolu- 
tionary organization of their own, with a base in the Mos- 
lem masses. 

Another company reviewed a brief history of relation- 
ships between the Moslems and Chinese, and another dis- 
cussed the necessity for strict observance of the rules of con- 
duct which had been issued to all soldiers stationed in iMo- 
hammedan, districts. These latter decreed that Red soldiers 
mtist not: enter the home of a Moslem without his consent; 
molest a mosque or a priest in any way; say “pig” or “dog” 
before Moslems, or ask them why they don’t eat pork; or 
call the Moslems “small faith” and the Chinese “big faith.” 

Besides these efforts to unite the whole army intelligently 



354 WITH THE RED ARMY 

behind the Moslem policy of the Reds, there was incessant 
Mmrk with the peasantry. Tlie two Moslem training regi- 
ments led in this propaganda, but companies in the Red 
Army also sent their propaganda corps from house to house, 
explaining Communist policies and urging the farmers to 
organize; the army dramatic clubs toured the villages, giving 
Mohammedan plays, based on local situations and incidents 
of history, and designed to “agitate” the population; leaflets, 
newspapers, and posters were distributed, written in Chinese 
and Arabic; and mass meetings were frequently called to 
form revolutionarv committees and village Soviets. The 
peasant, Chinese or Moslem, had a hard squeeze of it to avoid 
indoctrination to at least some degree. It was certainly “a 
system” — but it seemed to be working. By July several 
dozen JMohammedan communities in Ninghsia had elected 
village Soviets, and were sending delegates to Yu Wang Pao 
to confer with the Moslem Communists there. 

Four months later the Fourth Front Red Army was to 
cross the Yellow River, move over two hundred miles far- 
ther west, and reach Hsuchow, in Ma Pu-fang’s territory, 
astride the main road to Sinkiang, and their rapid advance 
was to be due to a large extent to good relations established 
at this early stage with the Moslem people. One of the most 
significant events in the development of that relationship oc- 
curred while I v^as in Ninghsia. Early in September enough 
progress had been made in Ninghsia to convene a meeting 
of over 300 Moslem delegates from Soviet committees 
elected by the villages then under the Red Army. A number 
of ahims, teachers, merchants, and two or three small land- 
lords were among them, but mostly they were poor farmers, 
members of the wealthier class having fled with the arrival 
of the “Han bandits.” The meeting of delegates elected a 
chairman and a provisional Moslem Soviet Government 
Committee. They passed resolutions to co-operate with the 
Red Army and accept its offer to help create an anti-Japa- 



MOSLEM AND MARXIST 355 

nese A'lohammedan Army, and to begin at once the organi- 
zation of a Chinese-A’Ioslem unity league, a poor people’s 
league, and a mass anti-Japanese society. 

Now, the last item of business attended to by this historic 
little convention — and I suspect the most important to the 
peasants there — was the disposal of a Kuomintang tax-col- 
lector. This man had evidently earned himself considerable 
enmity before the Reds arrived, and after that he had fled to 
a place called Changchia Cha, into some of the neighbouring 
hill villages, and there continued to collect his taxes. It was 
alleged that he had doubled liis levies — and announced that 
, this was due to the regulations of the new Red Government 
which he claimed to represent! But the Mohammedan farm- 
ers learned that the Reds appointed no tax-collectors, and 
half a dozen of them captured this miscreant and brought 
him into Yu Wang Pao for a mass trial. My personal reaction 
to the story was that any man who had sufficient nerve to 
act as an impostor in such a role at such a time had talents 
that should be preserved. The Moslems thought otherwise. 
There was no dissenting vote when the delegates took the 
decision to execute him. 

But he was the only civilian shot during the uvo weeks 
I spent in Yu Wang Pao. 






PART TEN: WAR AND PEACE 

/ 

Adore about Horses 

4 

O N AUGUST 29 I rode out to Hung Ch’eng Shui (Red 
City Waters), a pretty little town in Weichow 
county, famous for its beautiful fruit gardens of pears, ap- 
ples, and grapes, irrigated by crystal springs that bubbled 
through the canals. Here part of the 73rd Division was en- 
camped. Not far away was a fortified pass, and a temporary 
line with no trenches but with a series of small mole-like 
machine-gun nests, and round hilltop forts — ^low-walled 
earthwork defences — from which the Reds faced an enemy 
that had generally withdrawn from five to ten miles to the 
walled towns. There had been no movement on this front 
for several weeks, while the Reds rested and “consolidated” 
the new territory. 

Back in Yuwang Hsien again, I found the troops cele- 
brating with a melon feast the radio news from south Kansu 
that a whole division of Ala Hung-kuei’s Chinese troops had 
turned over to Chu Teh’s Fourth Front Red Army. Li. 
Tsung-yi, the commander of this Kuomintang division, had 
been sent to impede Chu Teh’s march to the north. His 
younger officers, among whom were secret Communists, led 
an uprising and took some 3,000 troops, including a battalion 
of cavalr)'^, to join the Reds near Lung Hsi. It was a big blow 

357 



-58 » WAR AND PEACE 

to Nanking’s defences in the south, and hastened the north- 
ward advance of the two southern armies. 

Two days later two of the three divisions of Hsu Flai- 
tung’s 1 5th Army Corps were prepared to move again, one 
column towards the south, to break open a path for Chu 
Teh, and the other to the west, and the valley of the Yellow 
River. Bugles began sounding at about three in the morning, 
and by six o’clock the troops were already marching. I was 
myself returning to Yu Wang Pao that morning with two 
Red officers who were reporting to P’eng Teh-huai, and I 
left the city by the south gate with Hsu Hai-tung and his 
staff, marching towards the end of the long column of 
troops and animals that wound like a grey dragon across the 
interminable grasslands, as far as you could see. 

The big army left the city quietly, except for the bark of 
bugles that never ceased, and gave an impression of efficient 
command. Plans for the march had been completed days 
earlier, I was told; every detail of the road had been exam- 
ined, the enemj^’s concentrations were all carefully charted 
on maps prepared by the Reds themselves, and guards had 
stopped all travellers from moving across the lines (which 
the Reds permitted, to encourage trade, except during bat- 
tles or troop movements), and now they went ahead un- 
known to the Kuomintang troops, as later surprise captures 
of enemy outposts were to prove. 

With this army I saw no camp followers except thirty or 
more Kansu greyhounds, who ran in a closed pack, ranging 
back and forth across the plain in chase of an occasional dis- 
tant gazelle or a prairie hog. They barked joyously and 
scrapped in excellent humour and evidently liked going to 
war. Many of the soldiers carried them pets along with them. 
Several had little monks on leashes of string, one had a pet 
slate-coloured pigeon perched on his shoulder; some had 
little white mice, and some had rabbits. Was this an army? 
From the youth of the warriors, and the bursts of song that 



Mi'l’.r 1 !!nu’,: 


.'5*'' 

i.nv.! iicv.n the !nn” lijic, it ;ec:r.cii more like n prep sehool 
on ;• holivi.re e'.cut^ion. 

A Uve /; heymu! the eitv an onlcr wa'- Muhienlv oivc.i 
for .1 pt.tc iicc air-raid dcl’enee. Ssjnru!*; of soldiers left (lie 
road e:ui mehcvi into the tall ora'"-, tionnin” their hi” witic 
eantoudaijc m.uic of ora-s. aiul their <;ra'-s .shonldcr- 

capes. .Maehute-iMin'- tthev had no anti-aircraft) were 
pite.hed at anpjes on !;rao,v hnol!'. he-ade tlie road in hopeful 
anticip itjon of a lou-dxiii” tarpet. In a few moments that 
uitolc dra”on had simplv hcen su allowed up on the laiul- 
seape, and you could, not lintintninh men from the numerous 
clusnp- of huneh-pras-. Onlv the mules, camels, and linr.ses 
rcniaitied si-ildc tm tile road, and aviators mipht have taken 
th.rse for ordina:\' i-ommerciaI caravans, 'riie cavalrv fwhich 
w,-.s then i:i the \ an”uaid, out <if si”ht ) had to talte it in the 
neck, lii'wcver, tlieir onlv pos-.ilile precautionarv measure 
heinp to .seek cover if it was available, otherwise merelv to 
■eattcr as wideis' as po^ .ildc, hut alwav*- remainin” mounted. 
Lkimonntcd durinp an air raiii, these .Monpolian ponies arc 
imp'osihlc to m.matte, and a v iiolc repiment can he thrown 
into conijilcte lii-order, 'l iie first contmaml to .a cavalrv unit 
at the drone <>{ aerojdancs is “.S'o.rm; ;/;a.'” (".Mount lior.'-e!’’) 

Tite manivnvrc havin',; licen pronounced .s.uisfactorv, we 
marcluni on. 

I.i < ;hi.ui”-!in Ivui heen riplu. 'I'he Reds' pnoil horses 
were all at ilie front, riieir cavalrv division was the pride of 
the armv, and everv man aspired to jironioiion to it. 'l licv 
were p!i\sicailv tlic pick' of the army, mounted on nhnut 
t.o io hc.miifii! Nim.'hsia ponies, line fleet animals taller and 
stron”er thm the .Mon',;olian ponies von .see in North China, 
with ■leek llan!;s and well-filled hnttocks. .Most of them had 
iieen cnji'med from ,Ma 1 lunp-kiiei and .Ma I Innp-pinp, but 
three v. -iole iiattaiions of horses h:ul liecn taken in a hattlc 
neir!’,' a '.a ;r lu fore with ( icneral 1 In Chn-kno, commander 
"■ '■.V.rtkiif; '■ hirst Cavalrv ■\niiv, includinp one hallalion of 



360 WAR AND PEACE 

all-white animals and one of all-blacks. They were the nu- 
cleus of the First Red Cavalry. 

People outside the Red districts had predicted, when the 
Reds went into Kansu and Ninghsia, that the Moslem cav- 
alry would break them to pieces. Events had proved other- 
wise. In 1935 a school had been opened in Shensi, and the 
nucleus of a Red cavalry had been trained by the German 
adviser, Li Teh, an expert horseman who was once in the 
Red Russian cavalry. Shensi and Kansu natives are many of 
them born to the saddle — unlike most southerners, who can- 
not ride — and a crack corps was soon developed out of this 
local material. In 1936 they took the field and introduced a 
new mode of mounted warfare in the North-west. 

The Moslems are superb horsemen, but they are not 
trained to fire from the saddle or to use sabres, nor is the 
Chinese cavalry. Their tactic is to ride swiftly in flank at- 
taclcs co-ordinated with the infantry, and, if this fails to rout 
the enemy, they dismount and fire from the ground, thus 
losing their mobility. Li Teh trained the Red cavalry to use 
sabres, crude affairs made in the Red arsenal, but serving the 
purpose well enough. Red cavalrymen quickly became re- 
spected for their phalanx sabre charge, and in a brief period 
of a year had a number of victories to their credit, and many 
new horses. 

I rode with the Red cavalry several days in Kansu — or 
more correctly, I walked with it. They lent me a fine horse 
with a captured V/estern saddle, but at the end of each day 
I felt that I had been giving the horse a good time instead of 
the contrary. This was because our battalion commander 
was so anxious not to tire his four-legged charges that M^e 
two-legged ones had to lead horse three or four li for every 
one we rode. He treated his horses as if they had been 
Dionne quintuplets, and I concluded that anyone who quali- 
fied for this man’s cavalry had to be a nurse, not a viafoo, 
and an even better walker than rider. I paid them due respect 



I MORE ABOUT HORSES 36 1 

for kindness to animals — no common phenomenon in China 
— but I was glad to disengage myself and get back to free- 
lance movement of my own, in which occasionally I could 
actually ride a horse. 

I had been grumbling about this mildly to Hsu Hai-tung, 
.and I suspect he decided to play a joke on me. To return to 
Yu Wang Pao he lent me a splendid Ninghsia pony, strong 
as a bull, that gave me one of the wildest rides of my life. 
My road parted with the 1 5th Army Corps near a big fort in 
the grassland. There I bade Hsu and his staff good-bye. 
Shortly afterwards I got on my borrowed steed, and from 
then on it was touch and s:o to see which of us reached Yu 
Wang Pao alive. 

The road lay level across the plain for over 50 li. In that 
whole distance we got down to a walk just once. He raced at 
a steady gallop for the last five miles, and at the finish I 
swept up the main street of Yu Wang Pao with my compan- 
ions trailing far behind. Before P’cng’s headquarters I slith- 
ered off and examined my mount, expecting him to topple 
over in a faint. He was puffing very slightly and had a few 
beads of sweat on him, but was otherwise quite unruffled, 
the beast. 

The real trouble with the ride had been the wooden Chi- 
nese saddle. It was so narrow that I could not sit in the seat, 
but literally had to ride on my inner thighs the whole dis- 
. tance. The short, heavy iron stirrups had cramped my legs, 
which now felt like logs. All I wanted was rest and sleep— 
but I did not get it. 




2 

‘^Little Red DeviW 



O NE morning I climbed the wide, thick, yellow wall of 
Yu Wang Pao, from the top of which you could look 
down thin y feet and see at a glance a score of different and 
somehow incongruously prosaic and intimate tasks being 
pursued below. It was as if you had pried off the lid of the 
city. A big section of the wall was being demolished, in fact, 
for this is one act of destruction the Reds do carry out. 
Walls are impediments to guerrilla warriors like the Reds, 
who endeavour to come to battle with an enemy iri open 
country, and if they fail there, they do not waste men in an 
exhausting defence of the walled city, where they can be 
endangered by blockade or annihilation, but withdraw and 
let the enemy put himself in that position if he likes. In any 
case, the broken wall simplifies their work if and when they 
are strong enough to attempt a reoccupation of the city. 

Half-way round the crenellated battlement I came upon 
a squad of buglers — at rest for once, I was glad to observe, 
for their plangent calls had been ringing incessantly for days. 
They were all Young Vanguards, mere children, and I as- 
sumed a somewhat fatlierly air towards one to whom I 
stopped and talked. He wore tennis shoes, grey shorts, and 
a faded grey cap with a dim red star on it. But there was 
nothing faded about the bugler under the cap: , he was rosy- 

.■56^ 



“little red devils” 363 

faced and had bright shining eyes, a lad towards whom your 
heart naturally warmed as towards a plucky waif in need of 
affection and a friend. How homesick he must be! I thought. 
I w'as soon disillusioned. He was no mama’s boy, but al- 
ready a veteran Red. He told me he was fifteen, and that he 
had joined the Reds in the South four years ago. 

“Four years!” I exclaimed incredulously. “Then you 
must have been only eleven when you became a Red? And 
you made the Long March?” 

“Right,” he responded with comical swagger. “I have 
been a hung-chnn for four years.” 

“Why did you join?” I asked. 

“My family lived near Changchow, in Fukien. I used to 
cut wood in the mountains, and in the winter I went there 
to collect bark. I often heard the villagers talk about the 
Red Army. They said it helped the poor people, and I liked 
that. Our house was very poor. We were six people, my par- 
ents and three brothers, older than I. We owned no land. 
Rent ate more than half our crop, so we never had enough. 
In the winter we cooked bark for soup and saved our grain 
for planting in the spring. I was always hungry. 

“One year the Reds came very close to Changchow. I 
climbed over the mountains and went to ask them to help 
our house because we were very poor. They were good to 
me. They sent me to school for a while, and I had plenty to 
eat. After a few months the Red Army captured Chang- 
chow, and went to my village. All the landlords and money- 
lenders and officials were driven out. My family was given 
land and did not have to pay the tax-collectors and land- 
lords any more. They were happy and they were proud of 
me. Two of mj?^ brothers joined the Red Army.” 

“Where are they now?” 

“Nou^? I don’t know. When we left Kiangsi they were 
with the Red Army in Fukien; they were with Fang Chih- 
mifi. Now, I don’t know.” 



364 WAR AND PEACE 

“Did the peasants like the Red Army?” 

“Like the Red Army, eh? Of course they liked it. The 
Red Army gave therji land and drove away the landlords, 
the tax-collectors, and the exploiters.” (These “little devils” 
all had their Marxist vocabulary.) 

“But, really, how do you knoiu they liked the Reds?” 

“They made us a thousand, ten thousands, of shoes, with 
their own hands. The women made uniforms for us, and the 
men spied on the enemy. Every home sent sons to our Red 
Army. That is how the lao-pai-hsing treated us!” 

No need to ask him whether he liked his comrades: no 
lad of thirteen would tramp 6,000 miles with an army he 
hated. 

Scores of youngsters like him were with the Reds. The 
Young Vanguards were organized by the Communist Youth 
League, and altogether, according to the claims of ‘Fang 
Wen-ping, secretary of the C.Y.L., there were then some 
40,000 in the North-west Soviet districts. There must have 
been several hundred with the Red Army alone: a “model 
company” of them was in every Red encampment. They 
were youths between twelve and seventeen (really eleven to 
sixteen by foreign count), and they came from all over 
China. Many of them, like this little bugler, survived the 
hardships of the march from the South. Many joined the 
Red Army during its expedition to Shansi. 

The Young Vanguards worked as orderlies, messboys, 
buglers, spies, radio-operators, water-carriers, propagandists, 
actors, vjofoos, nurses, secretaries, and even teachers! I once 
saw such a youngster, before a big map, lecturing a class of 
new recruits on world geography. Two of the most graceful 
child dancers I have ever seen were Young Vanguards in 
the dramatic society of the First Army Corps, and had 
marched from Kiangsi. 

You might wonder how they stood such a life. Hun- 
dreds must have died or been killed. There were over 200 of 



“little red devils” 365 

them in the filthy jail in Sianfu, who had been captured 
doing espionage or propaganda, or as stragglers unable to 
keep up with the army on its march. But their fortitude was 
amazing, and their loj'^alty to the Red Army was the intense 
and unquestioning loyalty of the very young. 

Most of them wore uniforms too big for them, with 
sleeves dangling to their knees and coats dragging nearly to 
the ground. They washed their hands and faces three times 
a da)% they claimed, but they were always dirty, their noses 
were usually running, and they were often wiping them 
with a sleeve, and grinning. The world nevertheless was 
theirs; they had enough to eat, they had a blanket each, the 
leaders even had pistols, and they wore red bars, and broken- 
peaked caps a size or more too large, but with the red star 
on it. They were often of uncertain origin: many could not 
remember their parents, many were escaped apprentices, 
some had been slaves, most of them were runaways from 
huts with too many mouths to feed, and all of them had 
made their own decisions to join, sometimes a whole group 
of youngsters running off to the Reds together. 

Many stories of courage were told of them. They gave 
and asked no quarter as children, and many had actually 
participated in battles. They say that in Kdangsi, after the 
main Red Army left, hundreds of Young Vanguards and 
Young Com.munists fought with the partisans, and even 
made bayonet charges — so that the M^hite soldiers laugh- 
ingly said they could grab their bayonets and pull them into 
their trenches, they were so small and light. Many of the 
captured “Reds” in Chiang’s reform schools for bandits in 
Kiangsi were youths from ten to fifteen years old. 

Perhaps the Vanguards liked the Reds because among 
them they were treated like human beings probably for the 
first time. They ate and lived like men; they seemed to take 
part in everything; they considered themselves any man’s 
equal. I never saw one of them struck or bullied. Tliey were 



■^(,6 WAR AND PEACE 

certainly “exploited” as orderlies and messboys (and it was 
surprising how many orders starting at the top were even- 
tually passed on to some Young Vanguard), but they had 
their own freedom of activity, too, and their own organiza- 
tion to protect them. They learned games and sports, they 
were given a crude schooling, and they acquired a faith in 
simple Marxist slogans — which in most cases meant to them 
simply helping to shoot a gun against the landlords and mas- 
ters of apprentices. Obviously it was better than working 
fourteen hours a day at the master’s bench, and feeding him, 
and emptying his “defile-mother” night-bowl! 

I remember one such escaped apprentice I met in Kansu 
who was nicknamed the Shansi Wa-wa — the Shansi Baby. 
He had been sold to a shop in a town near Hung T’ung, in 
Shansi, and when the Red Army came he had stolen over 
the city wall, with three other apprentices, to join it. How 
he had decided that he belonged with the Reds I do not 
know, but evidently all of Yen Hsi-shan’s anti-Communist 
propaganda, all the warnings of his elders, had produced ex- 
actly the opposite effect from that intended. He was a fat 
roly-poly lad with the face of a baby, and only twelve, but 
he was quite able to take care of himself, as he had proved 
during the march across Shansi and Shensi and into Kansu. 

D 

When I asked him why he had become a Red he said: “The 
Red Army fights for the poor. The Red Army is anti-Japa- 
nese. Why should any man not want to become a Red 
soldier.^” 

Another time I met a bony youngster of fifteen, who 
was head of the Young Vanguards and Young Commmnists 
working in the hospital near Holienwan, Kansu. His home 
had been in Hsing Kuo, the Reds’ model hsien in Kiangsi, 
and he said that one of his brothers was still in a partisan 
army there, and that his sister had been a nurse. He did not 
know what had become of his family. Yes, they all liked the 
Reds. Why? Because they “all understood that the Red 



“little red devils" 367 

Army -was our army — fighting for the wii-ch’ttn chieh-chi” 
— the proletariat. I wondered what impressions the great 
trek to the North-west had left upon his young mind, but I 
was not to find out. The whole thing was a minor event to 
this serious-minded bov, a little matter of a hike over a dis- 
tance about twice the width of America. 

“It was prett)^ bitter going, eh.'” I ventured. 

“Not bitter, not bitter. No march is bitter if your com- 
rades are with you. We revolutionary j'-ouths can’t think 
about whether a thing is hard or bitter; we can only think 
of the task before us. If it is to tt'alk 10,000 U, we walk it, or 
if it is to walk 20,000 U, we walk it!” 

“How do you like Kansu, then? Is it better or worse 
than KLiangsi? Was life better in the South?” 

“Kiangsi was good. Kansu is also good. Wherever the 
revolution is, that place is good. What we eat and where we 
sleep is not important. What is important is the revolution.” 

Copy-book replies, I thought. Here was one lad who had 
learned his answers well from some Red propagandist. Next 
day I was quite surprised when at a mass meeting of Red 
soldiers I saw that he was one of the principal speakers, and 
a “propagandist” in his own right. He was one of the best 
speakers in the army, I was told, and in that meeting he gave 
a simple but competent explanation of the present political 
situation, and the reasons tvhy the Red Army tvanted to stop 
civil v'ar and form a “united front” with all anti-Japanese 
armies. 

I met a youth of fourteen who had been an apprentice in 
a Shanghai machine-shop, and with three companions had 
found his way, through various adventures, to the North- 
Avest. He was a student in the radio school in Pao An rvhen 
I saw him. I asked v^hether he missed Shanghai, but he said 
no, he had left nothing in Shanghai, and that the only fun he 
had ever had there was looking into the shop-windows at 
good things to eat — which he could not buy. 



^(58 WAR AND PEACE 

But best of all I liked the “little devil” in Pao An, who 
served as orderly to Li Ko-nung, chief of the communica- 
tions department of the Foreign Office. This hsiao-kuei was 
a Shansi lad of about thirteen or fourteen, and he had joined 
the Reds I know not how. He was the Beau Brummell of the 
Vanguards, and he took his role with utmost gravity. He 
had inherited a Sam Browne belt from somebody, he had a 
neat little uniform tailored to a good fit, and a cap whose 
peak he regularly refilled with new cardboard whenever it 
broke. Underneath the collar of his well-brushed coat he 
always managed to have a strip of white linen showing. He 
was easily the snappiest-looking soldier in town. Beside him 
Mao Tse-tung looked a tramp. 

But this nva-^a's name happened by some thoughtlessness 
of his parents to be Shang Chi-pang. There is nothing wrong 
with that, except that Chi-pang sounds very much like 
chi-pa, and so, to his unending mortification, he was often 
called cbi-pa, which simply means “penis.” One day Chi- 
pang came into my little room in the Foreign Office with his 
usual quota of ‘dignity, clicked his heels together, gave me 
the most Prussian-like salute I had seen in the Red districts, 
and addressed me as “Comrade Snow.” He then proceeded 
to unburden his small heart of certain apprehensions. What 
he wanted to do was to make it perfectly clear to me that 
his name was not Chi-pa, but Chi-pang, and that between 
these two there was all the difference in the world. He had 
his name carefully scrawled down on a scrap of paper, and 
this he deposited before me. 

Astonished, I responded in all seriousness that I had never 
called him anything but Chi-pang, and had no thought of 
doing otherwise. I half expected him to offer me the choice 
of swords or pistols. 

But he thanked me, made a grave bow, and once more 
gave that preposterous salute. “I wanted to be sure,” he said, 
that- when you write about me for the foreign papers you 



■^■JO WAR AND PEACE 

to perform in the building of a new world. It sounds som>;- 
what evangelical, I suppose, but nobody could see these 
heroic young lives without feeling that man in China is not 
born rotten, but with infinite possibilities of personality. 


3 

United Front in Action 

I N THE beginning of September, 1936, while I was at the 
front in Ninghsia and Kansu, the army under P’eng 
Teh-huai commenced moving westward towards the Yel- 
low River, and southward towards the Sian-Lanchow high- 
way, to establish connections with Chu Teh’s troops, coming 
up from the South — a manoeuvre which was to be brilliantly 
concluded at the end of October, when the combined Red 
Armies occupied nearly aU north Kansu above the Sian- 
Lanchow highway. 

But having now decided to seek a compromise with the 
Kuomintang in an attempt to “coerce” the latter into resist- 
ance against Japan, the Reds were becoming every day more 
of a force of political propagandists and less of an army in- 
tent on seizing power by conquest. New instructions from 
the Party ordered the troops to observe “United Front tac- 
tics in their future movements. And what were “United 
Front tactics”.^ Perhaps a day-by-day diary account of the 
manceuvres of the army at this time best answers that 
question: 

Fao Toil Shi’i, Septeinber 1. Leaving Yu Wang Pao, the. 



UNITED FRONT IN ACTION 37! 

headquarters of the First Front Army, walked for about 40 
/’/, Commander P’eng Teh-huai joking with the muleteers 
and generally having a lark. Most of the region travelled was 
hilly and mountainous. P’eng made his headquarters for the 
night in a Mohammedan peasant’s home in this little village. 

Maps immediately were put up on the wall and the radio 
began functioning. Messages came in. While P’eng was rest- 
ing, he called in the Mohammedan peasants, and explained 
the Red Army’s policies to them. An old lady sat and talked 
with liiifi for nearly n^■o hours, pouring out her troubles. 
Meanwhile a Red Army harvesting brigade passed by, on its 
way to reap the crop of a landlord who had run away. As a 
“traitor” his land was subject to confiscation. Another squad 
of men has been appointed to guard and keep clean the 
premises of the local mosque. Relations with the peasants 
seem good. A week ago the peasants in this hsmi, who have 
now lived under the Reds for several months without pay- 
ing taxes, came in a delegation to present P’eng with six cart-' 
loads of grain and provisions as an expression of gratitude 
for the relief. Yesterday some peasants presented P’eng with 
a handsome wooden bed — ^which amused him very much. 
He turned it over to the local ahun. 

Li Chou K’oic, September 2. On the road at four a.m. 
P’eng up long before. Met ten peasants, who had come with 
the army from Yu Wang Pao to help carry the wounded 
back to the hospital. They voluntarily asked to do this in 
order to fight Ada Hung-kuei, hated because he’d forced 
their sons to join the army. A Nanking bomber flew over- 
head, spotted us, and we scattered for cover. The whole 
army melted into the landscape. The plane circled twice and 
dropped one bomb — “laid an iron egg,” or “dropped some 
bird-dung,” as the Reds say — then strafed the horses and 
flew on to bomb our vanguard. One soldier, slow in taking 
cover, was wounded in the leg — a slight injury — and after it 
was dressed he walked without assistance. 



272 WAR AND PEACE 

From this village, where we are spending the night, very- 
little can be seen. One regiment of the enemy is holding a 
fort near here, a 15th Army Corps detachment attacking. 

From Yu Wang Pao comes a radio message reporting 
the visit of enemy bombers, which attacked the city and 
dropped ten bombs this morning. Some peasants were killed 
and wounded; no soldiers hit. 

Tiao Pao Tzu, September 5. Left Li Chou K’ou, and on 
the way many peasants came out and brought the soldiers 
pai clfa (white tea) — i.e., hot water, the favourite bfeverage 
in these parts. Mohammedan schoolteachers came over to 
bid P’eng good-bye and thank him for protecting the school. 
As we neared Tiao Pao Tzu (now over 100 li west of Yu 
Wang Pao) some of Ma Hung-kuei’s cavalry, withdrawing 
from an isolated position, ran into our rear. They were only 
a few hundred yards from us. Nieh (chief-of-staff) sent a 
detachment of headquarters cavalry to chase them, and they 
galloped off in a whirl of dust. A Red pack-train was at- 
tacked, and another detachment of soldiers was sent to re- 
cover the mules and loads. The caravan returned intact. 

Tonight some interesting items of news were posted on 
the bulletin board. Li Wang Pao is now surrounded, and in 
a fort near there a trench-mortar shell fell almost directly on 
Hsu Hai-tung’s headquarters. One young Vanguard was 
killed and three soldiers were wounded. In another place 
nearby, a White platoon commander, reconnoitring the 
Reds’ position, was captured by a surprise attack party. The 
Reds slightly wounded him and sent him back to head- 
quarters. P’eng raised hell over the radio because he was 
wounded. “Not good United Front tactics,” he commented. 
“One slogan is worth ten bullets.” He lectured the staff on 
the United Front and how to work it out in practice. 

Peasants sold fruit and melons on the road, the Reds pay- 
ing for everything they bought. One young soldier traded 



UNITED FRONT IN ACTION 373 

his pet rabbit for three melons in a long transaction with a 
peasant. After he’d eaten- the melons he was very dour, 
wanting his rabbit back! 

A report by phone said that a regiment of enemy had 
been surrounded by part of the Second Division (First 
Army Corps). Shouts of welcome, friendly slogans, and 
bugle calls were used as “greetings” to the enemy. The Reds 
sent them 200 sheep because they had no food, and with the 
sheep went a letter explaining Red Army policies. The 
Whites promised to reply that afternoon. In their letter the 
Reds proposed the programme of a United Front, peace be- 
tween them, and agreed not to fire if they withdrew. At uvo 
o’clock these troops (some of Ma Hung-kuei’s men) re- 
treated. “This is a successful step in the United Front strug- 
gle,” P’eng remarked jubilantly. Some Reds did after all fire 
on them, but these seem to have been a few “individualists.” 
They could not see why they should let all those arms out 
of their hands. For this they were severely reprimanded and 
given more lectures on the United Front. Some soldiers 
could not understand, and wanted to capture the Whites, 
but they were prevented from doing this. Here the Reds 
could have captured a cavaliy detachment also, but were 
ordered not to do so. 

This tendency of the rank and file to oppose the United 
Front programme was discussed by P’eng and the political 
department tonight. It is realized that “more educational 
work must be done.” 

Another item: at Ma Liang Wu one group of the enemy 
came over to the Red lines to attend an anti-Japanese mass 
meeting. They left their rifles behind, and at the invitation 
of the Reds came to listen to lectures, accompanied by their 
regimental commander. He said, “So far as these Japanese 
are concerned, we are ready to fight them. Just tell us how.” 
He told the Reds that his regiment and all iMa Hung-kuei’s 



374 WAR AND PEACE 

I'egiments, both Chinese and Moslem, had at least three 
Fascist (Blueshirt) spies each, and hence must co-operate 
secretly. 

Hsu Hai-tung rode over on his big mule for a confer- 
ence with P’eng and Tso Chuan (commander of the First 
Army Corps). Afterwards he told a story of one of the 15th 
Army Corps’ “little devils,” a dispatch-bearer on the front. 
He was given some messages to carry, and on the way he 
had to circle round a pao (fort) held by the enemy. Instead 
of taking the mountain path, he deliberately took the main 
road that led right in front of the enemy guns on the fort. 
As soon as they saw him the Whites sent out a squad of cav- 
alry to pursue him, but he had a fast horse and rode bare- 
back, and he left them far behind. “He always does this,” 
Hsu complained, “but he is the best dispatch-rider on the 
front.” 

Today’s news was celebrated by P’eng Teh-huai with a 
large watermelon feast: the melons here are cheap and ex- 
cellent. 

Tiao Pao Tzu, Septeinber 4-5. Liu Hsiao (of the political 
department) is now working among the Mohammedans near 
Li Wang Pao. Today he sent a report of some recent devel- 
opments there. One of Ma’s regiments asked to have a Mo- 
hammedan sent from the Red Aloslem regiment to talk to 
them. Ma’s regimental commander refused to meet the Red 
delegate, but permitted him to talk to his men. 

Wang (this Red Moslem delegate) returned and re- 
ported that he had seen Red handbills all over the troops’ 
quarters. He said that after talking to the troops for a few 
hours they became more and more interested, and finally the 
commander listened in, too, but, getting worried, decided to 
have him arrested. The men protested, and he was safely 
escorted back to the Red lines. The regiment sent a letter in 
reply to the one which Wang had carried to them from Liu 



UNITED FRONT IN ACTION 375 

Hsiao. They said they would not retreat because they had 
been ordered to hold this district, and must do so; that they 
were ready to make an agreement to fight Japan, but the 
Reds should negotiate with their division commander; that 
if the Reds would not fight them, they would not fight the 
Reds; and that letters and pamphlets sent by the Reds had 
been distributed among the men. 

Two planes bombed a Red cavalry detachment near here 
today. No men nor horses were hit, but one bomb struck a 
corner of a village mosque, and three old Moslem attendants 
were killed. This doesn’t increase local affection for Nan- 
king. ^ 

Tiao Pao Tzti, September 6. A day of rest and recreation. 
All commanders of the First Army Corps met at P’eng’s 
headquarters for a melon feast, while the soldiers rested and 
had sports and a melon feast of their own. P’eng called a 
meeting of all company commanders and higher, and there 
was a political session. They permitted me to attend. A sum- 
mary of P’eng’s speech follows: 

“Reasons for our movement to these districts are first to 
enlarge and develop our Soviet districts; secondly, to co- 
operate vdth movement and advance of the Second and 
Fourth Front Armies (in south Kansu); thirdly, to liquidate 
the influence of Ma Hung-kuei and Aia Hung-ping in these 
regions and form a United Front directly with their troops. 

“We must enlarge the basis of the United Front here. 
We must decisively influence those White commanders who 
are now sympathetic and win them over definitely to our 
side. We have good contacts with many of them now; we 
must continue our work, by letter, in our Press, through 
delegates, through the secret societies, etc. 

“We must liberate the Mohammedan masses here as 
quickly as possible, arming them as soon as they have been 



WAR AND PEACE 

organized, and have formed their own representative Gov- 
ernment, and thus develop at an early stage an anti-Japanese 
Moslem army. 

“We must intensify our educational work among our 
own troops. In several recent instances our men have vio- 
lated the United Front policy by firing on troops that we 
had agreed to permit to withdraw. In other instances men 
were reluctant to return captured rifles and had to be or- 
dered several times to do<§o. This is not a breach of disci- 
pline, but a lack of confidence in their commanders’ orders, 
showing that the men do not fully understand the reasons 
for such actions, some men actually accusing their leaders of 
'counter-revolutionary orders.’ One company commander 
received a letter from a White commander and did not even 
read it, but tore it up, saying, ‘They are all the same, these 
Whites.’ This shows that we must more deeply instruct the 
rank and file; our first lectures have not made their ppsition 
clear to them. We must ask for their criticism and make such 
modifications in our policy as they think necessary after 
thorough discussion and explanation. We must impress upon 
them that the United Front policy is no trick to fool the 
Whites, but that it is a basic policy and in line with the deci- 
sions of our Party. 

“In Kiangsi, Chiang Kai-shek spread vile lies about us 
and our policies, and his blockade prevented us from giving 
any refutation to the Chinese people 'outside our areas. Now 
his Fascists are spreading lies about us here and attacking our 
anti-Japanese policy by comparing the resources of China 
and Japan. Chiang suppresses the truth, and he does not men- 
tion either that the Chinese anti-imperialist movement is not 
isolated, but has friends such as the Soviet Union and the 
Japanese proletariat itself. We must make the enemy troops 
understand clearly the basis of the anti-Japanese movement, 
and defeat these Fascist lies. 

“After the East Attack (into Shansi) many of our com- 



378 WAR AND PEACE 

hundred new enlistments each, and this was seconded and 
passed unanimously. 

After dinner there was a new play by the dramatic club 
of the First Army Corps, based on experiences of the past 
week. It portrayed in an amusing way the mistakes of the 
commanders and men in carrying out the new policy. One 
scene showed an argument between a commander and a 
warrior; another between two commanders; a third showed 
a company commander tearing up a letter he had received 
from the Whites. 

'In the second act most of these mistakes were shown cor- 
rected and the Red Army and anti-Japanese Moslem Army 
were marching together, and singing and fighting side by 
side against the Japanese and the Kuomintang. Seemed magi- 
cally quick work by the education-through-entertainment 
department. 

A report came in that there was a heavy bombardment of 
Li Wang Pao (held by Kuomintang troops) by Nanking 
planes. Evidently the pilots thought their troops had already 
withdrawn, because the Reds are all around the place. Dur- 
ing the bombardment some Mohammedan soldiers ran out- 
side the walls and hid in the caves in the mountain, but the 
Reds did not fire on them. P’eng said this often happened in/ 
Kiangsi, and sometimes whole towns and groups of min- 
fuan or Nanking troops were destroyed by Chiang Kai- 
shek’s own aeroplanes, whose pilots thought they were 
bombing Reds. 

The vanguard has not yet reached Hai Yuan, but a few 
points of enemy defence are being cleared before proceed- 
ing farther. These positions are at Li Wang Pao and Ma 
Liang Wu. The whole Kuyuan valley and west to Kaiyuan 
are to be Sovietized first. The Reds are now moving into a 
tvholly Mohammedan region, and will not be in thickly 
populated Chinese areas again until they reach the Yellow 
River \'alley, at Ching-yuan, 



CONCERNING CHU TEH: 379 

During the next month the attention of ever)* Red in 
China was to be, focused anxiously upon the series of ma- 
noeuvres by which, for the first time in the history of the 
Soviets, all the main forces of the Red Army were eventually 
united and concentrated in a single great area. And here 
some illumination should be shed upon the leadership of this 
second great trek from the South — ^upon Chu Teh, com- 
mander-in-chief of the “All China” Red Army, who, after a 
heartbreaking winter spent on the frozen marches of Tibet, 
was now pouring the Second and Fourth Front Armies into 
the North-west in a drive of unexpected vigour and success. 


4 

4 

Concerning Chii Teh 



U NLIKE Shakespeare, Confucius held that names were 
of first importance. In Chu Teh, at least, there is 
much. It is a strong-sounding name which should really be 
spelled Ju Deh in English, for so it is pronounced. But it is 
an appropriate name, because by a strange accident of lan- 
guage these two characters in Chinese mean “Red Virtue,” 
although for the fond parents who yclept him thus when he 
was born in far-away Ni Lung, Szechuan, it was impossible 
to foresee the political meaning which that name later on 
was to acquire. Impossible, or they would surely have 
changed it in terror. 

Now the remarkable thing about Chu Teh as a study in 
character development is not that he “gave many years of 



380 WAR AND PEACE 

his life to heavy exhausting labour as a coolie,” and rose 
from this lowly status to champion the oppressed, as an in- * 
accurate account of him in a Comintern publication^ de- 
clares, but, on the contrary, the uniqueness of his career is 
this: that this scion of a family of landlords, rising to power 
and luxury and dissipation while still young, was neverthe- 
less able, when past middle age, to discard the degenerate 
environment of his youth, to break, by a superb act of hu- 
man will, his addiction to narcotics, and finally even to for- 
sake his family, and devote his entire fortune to a revolu- 
tionary ideal which he believed to animate the highest cause 
and purpose of his time. For the success of this mission 
which had seized, shaken, and remade his character he staked 
a head which came to be valued at $250,000 by his infuriated 
enemies. 

As a youth Chu Teh was reckless, adventurous, and cou- 
rageous, moved by the legends of his people, by the tales of 
“free companions” of the Shiii Hu Chuaii, and by the ex- 
ploits of the heroes of the Romance of Three Kingdoms, 
who had fought over the fields and mountains of his native 
Szechuan. He gravitated naturally towards military life. 
Helped b)^^ his family’s political influence, he was accepted 
in the new Yunnan Military Academy, and he was among 
the first cadets in China to be given modern military training. 
Upon graduation from the Yunnan Academy he was com- 
missioned a lieutenant, and entered what the natives referred 
to as the “foreign army” — “foreign” because it used West- 
ern methods of drill and tactics, because it did not go into 
battle accompanied by Chinese musicians, and because for 
arms it used “foreign spears” — ^rifles with fixed bayonets on 
them. 

In the overthrow of the Man chu Dynasty in 1912 this 

1 China at Bay, January, 1936, published in London as a special 
supplement to The Communist International. It contains an equally 
erroneous account of the life of Mao Tse-tung. 



CONCERXING CHU TEH 38 1 

'Modem Army of Yunnan played a prominent role, and Chu 
Teh, leading a battalion of braves, soon distinguished him- 
self as a warrior of the republic. By 1916, when Yuan Shih- 
k’ai attempted to restore the monarchy, he was a brigadier- 
general, and his Yunnanese troops under the celebrated Ts’ai 
Ao were the first to raise the banner of revolt, which 
doomed Yuan’s imperial ambitions to defeat. At this time 
Chu Teh first became known throughout the southern prov- 
inces as one of the “four fierce generals” of Ts’ai Ao. 

With his prestige thus established, Chu Teh’s political 
fortunes pyramided rapidly. He became director of the Bu- 
reau of Public Safety in Yunnanfu, and then Provincial 
Commissioner of Finance. People of Yunnan and Szechuan 
agree that there are two things certain about officials: one is 
that they are corrupt, the other that they are opium- 
smokers. Reared in a region where opium was as commonly 
smoked as tea was drunk, and where parents customarily 
spread the drug on sugar-cane to soothe their bellowing in- 
fants, he had inevitably become a smoker. And given office 
by a bureaucracy which looked upon plunder of public 
funds not so much as a right as a duty to one’s family, he 
followed the example of superiors and manipulated the priv- 
ileges of office to enrich himself and his heirs. 

He went in for a harem, too. He is said to have acquired 
several wives and concubines, and he built for them and his 
progeny a palatial home in the capital of Yunnan. One might 
have thought he had everything he desired: wealtli, power, 
love, descendants, poppy dreams, eminent respectabilit}”-, 
and a comfortable future in which to preach the proprieties 
of Confucianism. He had, in fact, only one really bad habit, 
but it was to prove his downfall. He liked to read books. 

Pure realist though he had been till now, there seems to 
have been a strain of idealism and genuine revolutionary 
ardour latent in' his character. Influenced by reading, influ- 
enced also by a fety returned students who occasionally 



^82 WAR AND PEACE 

drifted into the backwash of Yunnan, Cnu Teh gradually 
understood that the revolution of 191 1 had been for the mass 
of the people a complete cipher; that it had merely replaced 
one despotic bureaucracy of exploitation with another. 
What is more, he seems to have worried about it — as any- 
one of feeling, living in Yunnanfu, a city of 40,000 slave 
girls and boys, might well have done. He seems to have been 
possessed by a sense of shame and simultaneously with an 
ambition to emulate the popular heroes of the West, and a 
desire to “modernize” China. The more books he read the 
more he realized his own ignorance and China’s backward- 
ness. Fie wanted to study and he wanted to travel. 

By 1922 Chu Teh had unburdened himself of his wives 
and concubines, pensioning them off in Yunnanfu. To one ' 
who knows the conservatism of China, and especially the 
feudal taboos of Yunnan, this act of repudiation of tradition 
is hardly believable, and indicates in itself a personality of 
unusual independence and resolution. Leaving Yunnan, he 
went to Shanghaj, where he met many young revolutionaries 
of the Kuomintang, which he had joined. Here also he came 
into contact with Left-wing radicals, who tended to look 
upon him condescendingly as an old-fashioned militarist. A 
corrupt official from feudal Yunnan, a many-wived general, 
an inveterate opium addict — could this also be a revolu- 
tionary? 

In the meantime, Chu Teh had determined to break him- 
self of the drug habit. It was not easy; he had been using 
opium for a long time. But this man had more steel in his 
will than his acquaintances supposed. For days he lay almost ' 
unconscious as he fought his noxious craving; then, taking a 
medicine cure along, he boarded a British steamer on the 
Yangtze, and took passage for Shanghai. No opium could be . 
bought or sold on board, and for weeks he sailed down the 
river, pacing the deck, never going ashore, fighting this 



CONCERNING CHU TEH 383 

hardest battle of his life. But after a month on board he left 
the ship with clear eyes, a ruddy glow on his cheeks, and a 
new confidence in his step. After a final hospital cure in 
Shanghai, he began a new life in earnest. 

Chu Teh was now about forty, but he was in excellent 
-health, and his mind was eagerly reaching out for new 
knowledge. Accompanying some Chinese students, he went 
to Germany, where he lived for a while near Hanover. 
There he met many Communists, and at this time seems to 
have seriously taken up the study of Marxism and become 
enamoured of new perspectives opened up by the theory of 
social revolution. In this study he was chiefly tutored by 
Chinese students young enough to be his own sons — for he 
never learned French, he knew only a smattering of Ger- 
man, and he was a poor linguist. One of his student-teachers 
in Germany told me how deadly in earnest he had been; 
how patiently, ploddingly, stubbornly, he struggled amid 
the confusion of an impact of a whole new world of ideas 
to integrate the basic truths and meanings, how great had 
been the intellectual effort with which he divested himself 
of all the prejudices and limitations of his traditional Chinese 
training. 

In this way he read some histories of the Great \Var, and 
familiarized himself with the politics of Europe. One day a 
student friend of his came to see him, talking e.xcitedly about 
a book called State and Revohtiion. Chu Teh asked him to 
help him read it, and thus he became interested in Marxism 
and the Russian Revolution. He read Bukharin’s A B C of 
Conmiimisin, and his works on dialectical materialism, and 
then he read more of Lenin. The powerful revolutionary 
movement then active in Germany swept him, with hun- 
dreds of Chinese students, into the struggle for world revo- 
lution. He joined the Chinese branch of the Communist 
Party founded in Germany. 



584 WAR AND PEACE ^ 

“Chu Teh had an experienced, disciplined, practical 
mind,” a comrade who knew him in Germany told med “He 
was an extremely simple man, modest and unassuming. He 
always invited criticism; he had an insatiable appetite for 
criticism. In Germany he lived the simple life of a soldier. 
Chu Teh’s original interest in Communism sprang from his 
sympathy for the poor, which had also brought him into the 
Kuomintang. He believed strongly in Sun Yat-sen for a 
while, because of Sun’s principles advocating land for the 
tillers, and the limitation of private capital. But not until he 
began to understand Marxism did he realize the inadequacy 
of Sun Yat-sen’s programme.” 

Chu Teh also lived for some time in Paris, where he en- 
tered a school for Chinese students which had been estab- 

7 * -1- - -1 I i--_? - 

iJ~y V V i“z:rcnTcn^ a vwcv-juaxA ix£ai..xwjijic4x a wv v^Aui,jiwij.aA^ v/x 

the Kuomintang. In France and in Germany he sat at the 
feet of his young German, French, and Chinese instructors, 
and he humbly listened, quietly interrogated, debated, 
sought. clarity and understanding. “To be modern, to under- 
stand the meaning of the revolution,” his youthful tutors 
kept repeating, “you must go to Russia, Tliere you can see 
the future.” And again Chu Teh followed their advice. In 
Moscow he entered the Eastern Toilers’ University, vdtere 
he studied Marxism under Chinese teachers. Late in 1925 he 
returned to Shanghai, and from that time on he worked un- 
der the direction of the Communist Party, to which he soon 
gave his fortune. 

Chu Teh rejoined his former superior and fellow Yun- 
nanese. General Chu Pei-teh, whose power in the Kuomin- 
tang Army was second only to that of Chiang Kai-shek. In- 
1927, when General Chu Pei-teh’s forces occupied several 

^This account is based chiefly on biographical notes given to me 
by Commander Li Chiang-lin (who was on Chu Teh’s staff from the 
earliest days in Kiangsi), supplementcd^by brief data from Mao Tse- 
tung, P’eng Teh-huai, and others. 



CONCERNING CHU TEH 385 

provinces south of the Yangtze, he made Chu Teh chief of 
the Bureau of Public Safety in Nanchang, capital of Kiangsi. 
There also he took command of a training regiment of ca- 
dets, and there he made contact with the Ninth Kuomintang 
Army, stationed farther south in Kiangsi. In the Ninth 
Army were detachments that had formerly been under his 
personal command in Yunnan. Thus the stage was prepared 
for the August Uprising in Nanchang, in which Communist 
troops first began the long open struggle for power against 
the Kuomintang. 

August 1, 1927, was a day of great decision for Chu Teh. 
Ordered by his commander-in-chief, Chu Pei-teh, to sup- 
press the insurrection, Chu Teh (who had helped organize • 
it) instead joined with the rebels, renouncing the remaining 
connections with his past, to come out openly as a Red. 
When, after the defeat of Ho Lung, he headed his police and 
his training regiment southward with the rebels, the city 
gates which closed behind him were symbolic of the final 
break with the security and success of his youth. Ahead of 
him lay years of unceasing struggle. 

Part of the Ninth Army went with Chu Teh also, as the 
straggling band of revolutionaries swept down to Swatow, 
captured it, were driven out, and then withdrew again to 
Kiangsi and Hunan. Among Chu Teh’s chief lieutenants at 
that time were Wang Erh-tso and Chien Yi, Whampoa ca- 
dets who were later killed in battle, and Lin Piao, who later, 
became president of the Red Academy. They did not yet 
call themselves a Red Army, but renamed only as the Na- 
tional Revolutionary Army. After the retreat from Fukien, 
Chu Teh’s forces were reduced, by desertions and casual- 
ties, to 900 men,' with a fire power of only 500 rifles, one 
machine-gun, and a few rounds of ammunition each. 

In this situation Chu Teh accepted an offer to connect 
with General Fan Shih-sheng, another Yunnan corhmander 
whose big army was then stationed in southern Hunan, and 



3 86 WAR AND PEACE 

who, though not a Communist, tolerated Communists in his 
army, hoping to use them politically against Chiang Kai- 
shek. As a Yunnanese he was also inclined to give haven to 
his fellow provincials. Here Chu Teh’s troops were incor- 
porated as the 140th Regiment, and he became chief political 
adviser to the i6th Army. And here he had the narrowest 
escape of his life. 

Communist influence in Fan Shih-sheng’s army rapidly 
increased, and soon an anti-Bolshevik faction, secretly con- 
nected with Chiang Kai-shek, planned a coup against Chu 
Teh. One night he was staying in an inn with only forty of 
his followers, when he was attacked by a force under Hu 
Chi-lung, leader of the coup. Shooting began at once, but it 
was dark and the assassins could not see clearly. When sev- 
eral of them aimed revolvers at Chu Teh’s head he cried out 
excitedly, “Don’t shoot me. I’m only the cook. Don’t shoot 
a man who can cook for you!” The soldiers, touched to the 
stomach, hesitated, and Chu Teh was led outside for closer 
inspection. There he was recognized by a cousin of Hu Chi- 
lung, who shouted, “Here is Chu Teh! Kill him!” But Chu 
Teh pulled out a concealed weapon of his own, shot the 
man, overcame his guard, and fled. Only five of his men es- 
caped with him. 

This incident explains the nickname by which Chu Teh 
has ever since been known in the Red Army — “Chief of 
the Cooks.” 

Rejoining his regiment, Chu Teh notified Fan Shih-sheng 
that he was withdrawing, whereupon Fan is said to have 
presented him with a gift of $50,000 to keep his goodwill, 
for the issue against Chiang Kai-shek was still not clearly de- 
cided, and free-lance allies like these young Communists, 
who had considerable influence on many of his officers and 
men, were not to be lightly spurned. But in the months 
ahead the money w'as to prove inadequate. The little army 
vA^^s now held together almost solely by loyalty to Chu Teh 



CONCERNING CHU TEH 387 

and a few of his commanders. Party affairs were in great 
confusion, no definite “line” had been established, and mili- 
tary strategy was undecided. Chu’s troops still wore Kuo- 
mintang uniforms, but they tvere in rags; many of them had 
no shoes, and poor food, or often no food at all, caused 
steady desertions. But some encouragement had been pro- 
vided by the neu'S of the Canton Commune, however, which 
had suggested a clear line of action, Chu Teh reformed his 
army into three sections, calling it the “Peasant Column 
Army,” and moved to the Hunan-Kiangsi-KAvangtung bor- 
der, Avhere he united tvith some bandits led by a radical stu- 
dent, and began a programme of ta.v-abolition, redistribution 
of land, and confiscation of the property of the rich. Yih 
Chang hs'mi u^as occupied as a base, after a bloody struggle, 
and the young army eked out the winter on squash and 
political debates. 

Meanwhile Mao Tse-tung’s peasant army had marched 
mgloriously through Hunan, to come at last to sanctuary at 
Chinglcanslian, on the southern Kiangsi-Hunan border, 
where with the help of the bandit leaders Wang Tso and 
Yuan Wen-tsai they had occupied two surrounding coun- 
ties, and built up in the mountains a nearly impregnable base. 
To Chu Teh, not far away, the “Peasants’ and Workers’ 
Red Army” of Mao Tse-tung sent as delegate his brother, 
Mao Tse-ming. He brought insti'uctions from the Party to 
unite forces, and news of a definite programme of partisan 
warfare, agrarian revolution, and the building of Soviets. 
When, in May, igzS, the two armies combined at Ching- 
kanshan, they Avere in control of five counties, and had some 
50,000 followers. Of these about 4,000 Avere armed Avith 
rifles, some 10,000 being equipped only AAUth spears, SAvords, 
and hoes, while the rest Ai^erc unarmed Party workers, prop- 
agandists, or families of the Avarribrs, including a large num- 
ber of children. 

Thus began the famous Chu-Mao combination which 



388 WAR AND PEACE 

Avas to make history in South China for the next six years. 
The story thenceforth is fairly well known. Mao Tse-tung 
has related how the programme of the Soviets evolved and 
how the Red Army developed. Chu Teh’s ascension as a 
formidable military leader followed the same curve of 
growth as the Soviets. 

At the First Soviet Congress, in 1931, Chu Teh was unani- 
mously elected commander-in-chief of the Red Army. 
Within two years four army corps had been built up, with 
a firing power of some 50,000 rifles and hundreds of ma- 
chine-guns, mostly captured from enemy troops, and the 
Soviets controlled vast areas of southern Kiangsi and parts 
of Hunan and Fukien. Intensified political training had be- 
gun, an arsenal had been erected, elementary social revolu- 
tionary economic and political reforms were being realized 
throughout the Soviets. Red Army uniforms were being 
turned out day and night to equip new partisans, and revo- 
lutionary morale was strengthening. In two years more the 
Red forces had been doubled. 

During these years in the South, Chu Teh led the com- 
bined Red Armies in hundreds of skirmishes, through scores 
of major battles, and through the brunt of five great anni- 
hilation campaigns, in the last of which he faced an enemy 
with technical offensive power (including heavy artillery, 
aviation, and mechanized units) estimated at from eight to 
nine times greater than his otvn, and resources many, many 
times exceeding anything at his disposal. However his de- 
gree of success or failure is to be measured, it must be ad- 
mitted that for tactical ingenuity, spectacular mobility, and 
richness of versatility in manoeuvre, he repeatedly proved his 
superiority to every general sent against him, and established 
beyond any doubt the formidable fighting power of revolu- 
tionized Chinese troops in partisan warfare. The great mis- 
takes of the Red Army in the South were strategic, and for 



CONCERNING CHO TEH 389 

those the political leadership must be held chiefly respon- 
sible. Even with such blunders, however, there is little doubt 
that had the Red Army been able to face their enemy on 
anything even approximating equal terms in the Fifth Cam- 
paign, the result would have been a catastrophic defeat for 
Nanking — ^Nazi advisers notwithstanding. 

For pure military strategy and tactical handling of a 
great army in retreat nothing has been seen in China to com- 
pare with Chu Teh’s splendid generalship of the Long 
March, already described. And to sheer personal magnetism 
of leadership, and the rare human quality which inspires in 
followers that unquestioning faith and devotion that gives 
men the courage to die in a cause — to this must be attributed 
the unbroken unity with which the forces under him with- 
stood the terrible winter of siege and hardship, eating noth- 
ing but yak meat, on the icy wind-driven plateaus of Tibet. 
It is hard to imagine Chiang Kai-shek or any other Kuo- 
mintang general in China surviving with an army under 
such circumstances, to say nothing of actually staging a 
comeback at the end of that ordeal, and launcliing a big at- 
tack to drive a wedge right through the defence lines of 
enemy troops that had been comfortably preparing for 
months to prevent it. Which Avas what Chu Teh was doing 
as I rode across the North-Avest. 

No Avonder Chinese legends credit him Avith all sorts of 
. miraculous poAvers; the ability to see loo H on all sides, the 
power to fly, and the mastery of Taoist magic, such as cre- 
ating dust clouds before an enemy, or stirring a wind against 
them. Superstitious folk believe he is invulnerable, for have 
not thousands of bullets and shells failed to destroy him? 
Others say he has the pOAA'er of resurrection, for has not the 
Kuomintang repeatedly declared him dead, often giving mi- 
nute details of the manner in Avhich he expired? Millions 
know the name “Red Virtue” in China, and to each it is a 



390 WAR AND PEACE 

menace or a bright star of hope, according to his status in 
life, but to ail it is a name imprinted on the pages of a decade 
of history. 

Yet everybody told me Chu was unimpressive in appear- 
ance — a quiet, modest, soft-spoken, old-shoe sort of man, 
large-eyed (“very kind eyes,” was the frequent expression), 
short, rather stockily built, but with arms and legs of iron. 
He is now over fifty, perhaps as much as fifty-three or fifty- 
four, nobody knew exactly— but Li Chiang-lin laughingly 
told me that he has been saying he is forty-six ever since he 
could remember. It seemed to be a little jest of his own; and 
Li thought he had stopped counting his age when he mar- 
ried his present wife — a big-boned peasant girl, who is an 
excellent shot and an expert rider, an Amazon who has led a 
partisan brigade of her own, and carried wounded comrades 
on her shoulder, a woman with big hands and feet like a man, 
robust, in hearty health, and courageous. 

Chu Teh’s devotion to his men is proverbial. Since as- 
suming command of the Army he has lived and dressed like 
the rank and file, has shared all their hardships, often going 
without shoes in the early days, living one whole winter on 
squash, another on yak meat, never complaining, rarely sick. 
He likes to wander through the camp, they say, sitting with 
the men and telling stories, or playing games with them. He 
plays a good game of table tennis, and a wistful game of 
basketball. Any soldier in the Army can bring his complaints 
directly to the commander-in-chief — and frequently does. 
Chu Teh takes his hat off when he addresses his men. On the 
Long March he lent his horse to tired comrades, walking 
much of the way, seemingly tireless. 

Yet people who have fallen victim to the Reds no doubt 
saw in him a fiend in human form. Class war knows little 
mc^c}^ Many of the horror stories spread about the Reds 
have now been discredited, but it would be naive to suppose 
that Chu Teh has not found it a “revolutionary necessity” 



c,,„ 

and j(] f/, loyalty ‘ ^*'ncecd m i • ^9' 

'».« ,,f “idt, “"P'awy to ^“'"'“ion ;.e 

e C ,“'«'>9 to o„ !: no ‘'“.n/.oAed, 

" it/.ouVn c..,„„P "^t and obc,.. Ann 

pin,:;" '-andit:"'? 59, a,„ >'99 


"'■a 'na.«c; ,,r' aonfd Lrrateiy to ^ ™®on I 

‘aKcvc tl 'll ”'«'’t to i '’aa" nj *a„/,on>« 

" ftbouVn "““as Mnni;, 'aat and obc,.- o?"*' Aa, 

'J-^nic is a/ J j ^>e/d /,/„, h '''^’° an 

'“'■ '"""an ir'°"afecd ZZ''°1 


St ll nn,^ • T. 

.a^aat n» "" 

'"""an ir -"-feed 

/ough 





PART ELEVEN: BACK TO P A O AN 

1 


Casuals of the Road 



F rom Nlnghsia I nirncd southward again into Kansu. 

In four or five days I was back in Holienwan, where 
again I saw Tsai Chang and her husband, Li Fu-chen, and 
had another meal of French cooking with them, and met the 
young and pretr\* wife of Nieh Jung-chen, political com- 
missar of tile First Arm}- Corps. She had i)ut recently slipped 
into the Soviet districts from the White World, and had 
notv just returned from a visit to her husband, whom she 
had not seen for five years. 

I stayed three dat's in Flolicnwan tt'ith the supply com- 
missariat, which was quartered in a big compound formerly 
owned by a Mohammedan grain merchant. Architecturally 
it was an interesting group of buildings of a generally Cen- 
tral Asian appearance, with flat heavy roofs, and deep Arabic 
windows set into walls at least four feet thick. As I led my 
horse into its spacious stables a tall white-bearded man, 
w'earing a faded grey uniform, with a long leather apron 
that reached to the ground, stepped up and saluted his red- 
starred cap, w'hilc his sunburned face wreathed a toothless 
smile. He took charge of Ma Hung-kuei — my horse. 

How on earth, I wondered, had this grandfather wan- 
dered into our boy-scout encampment? I stopped to ask, and 

393 



BACK TO PAO AN 

forced a story from him. He was from Shansi, and had 
joined the Red Army during its expedition there. His name 
was Li, he was sixty-four, and he claimed the distinction of 
being the oldest Red “warrior.” Rather apologetically he ex- 
plained that he was not at the front just then “because Com- 
mander Yang thinks I am more useful here at this horse 
work, and so I stay.” 

Li had been a small pork-seller in the town of Hung 
T’ung, Shansi, before he became a Red, and he roundly 
cursed “Model Governor” Yen Hsi-shan and the local offi- 
cials, and their ruinous taxes. “You can’t do business in Hung 
T’ung,” he said; “they tax a man’s excrement.” When old Li 
had heard the Reds were coming he had decided to join 
them. His wife was dead, and his two daughters were both' 
married; he had no sons; he had no ties at all in Hung T’ung 
except his overtaxed pork business; and Hung T’ung was a 
“dead-man” sort of place, anyway. He wanted something 
livelier, and so the adventurer had crept out of the city to 
offer himself to the Reds. 

“When I wanted to enlist they said to me, ‘You are old. 
In the Red Army life is hard.’ And what did I say? I said, 
‘Yes, this body is sixty-four years old, it’s true, but I can 
M^alk like a boy of twenty, I can shoot a gun, I can do the 
work of any man. If it’s men you need, I can also serve,’ So 
they told me to come along, and I marched through Shansi 
with the Red Army, and I crossed the Yellow River with 
the Red Army, and here I am in Kansu.” 

I smiled and asked him whether it was any better than 
pork-selling. Did he like it? 

“Oh-ho! Pork-selling is a turtle-man’s sort of business! 
Here is work worth doing. A poor man’s army fighting for 
the oppressed, isn’t it? Certainly I like it.” The old man 
fumbled in his breast pocket and brought forth a soiled 
cloth, which he carefully unwrapped to reveal a worn little 
'tote-book. “See here,” he said. “I already recognize over 



CASUALS OK THE UOAD 395 

200 characters. Every day the Red Army teaches me four 
more. In Shansi I lived for si.vtv-four vears and yet nobodv 
ever taught.me to \vritc my name. Is the Red Anny good or 
isn’t it?” He pointed with intense pride to the crude scrawl 
of Ids characters that resembled the blots of muddy hen’s 
feet on dean matting, and faltcringU' he read off some newly 
inscribed piirn.scs. And then, as a sort of climax, he produced 
a stub of pencil and with an elaborate flourish he wrote his 
name for me. 

“I suppose you're thinking of marrving again,” I joked 
with him. He shook his head gravely and said no, what with 
one defile-mother Itorsc after another he had no time to 
think about the u’oman problem, and with that he ambled 
awav to look after his beasts. 

Next evening, as I was walking through an orchard be- 
hind the courtyard, I met another Shansi man, twenty years 
Li’s junior, but just as interesting. I heard a bsiao-kiiei calling 
out, “Li Pai T’anji! Li Pai T’ans;!” and looked in curiosity 
to see whom he w'as addressing as the “House-of-Qiristian- 
Worship!” There upon a little hill I found a barber shaving 
a youth’s head clean as an egg. Upon inquiry 1 discovered 
that his real name was Cilia Ho-chung, and that he had for- 
merly worked in the pharmacy of an American missionary 
hospital in P’ing Yang, Shansi. The “little devils” had given 
him this nickname because he was a Christian, and still said 
his prayers daily. 

Chia pulled up his trousers and showed me a bad wound 
on his leg, from which he still limped, and he yanked up his 
coat to display a wound on his belly, where he had also been 
hit. These, he explained, were souvenirs of battles, and that 
was why he was not at the front. This hair-cutting wasn’t 
his real job at all: he was cither a pharmacist or a Red 
warrior. 

Chia said that tw-o other attendants in that Ciiristian hos- 
pital had joined the Reds with him. Before leaving, they had 



396 


BACK TO PAO AN 


discussed their intention with the American doctor in the 
hospital, whose Chinese name was Li Jen. Dr. Li Jen was a 
good man, who healed the poor without charge and never 
oppressed people,” and when Chia and his companions had 
asked his advice he had said, “Go ahead. I have heard that 
the Reds are good and honest men and not like the other 
armies, and you should be glad to fight with them.” So off 
they had gone to become red, red Robin Hoods. 

“Maybe Dr. Li Jen just wanted to get rid of you,” I sug- 
gested. 

The barber indignantly denied it. He said he had always 
got along very well with Li Jen, who was an excellent man. 
He asked me to tell this Li Jen, if I ever saw him, that he 
was still alive, well, and happy, and that as soon as the revo- 
lution was over he was coming back to talce his old job in 
the pharmacy, I left House-of-Worship, with much reluc- 
tance. He was a fine Red, a good barber, and a real Christian. 

Incidentally, I met several Christians and ex-Christians 
among the Reds. Many Communist leaders — Chou En-lai is 
an outstanding example — were educated in foreign mission- 
ary schools, and some of them were once active Christians. 
Dr. Nelson Fu, head of the Red Army Medical Corps, was 
formerly a doctor in a Methodist hospital in Kiangsi. Al- 
though he volunteered to work with the Reds, and enthusi- 
astically supported them, he still adhered to his faith, and 
hence had not joined the Communist Party. 

In Kiangsi the Soviets carried on extensive “anti-God” 
propaganda. All temples, churches, and church estates were 
converted into State property, and monks, nuns, priests, 
preachers, and foreign missionaries were deprived of the 
rights of citizenship, but in the North-west a much milder 
policy of religious toleration was practised. Freedom of 
worship was a primary guarantee, in fact. All foreign mis- 
sion property was protected, and refugee missionaries were 
invited to return to their flocks. The Communists reserved 



CASUALS OF THE ROAD 


397 

the right to preach anti-religious propaganda of their own, 
holding the “freedom to oppose worship” to be a corollary 
of the democratic privilege of the freedom to worship. 

The only foreigners who took advantage of the new 
Communist policy towards religious institutions were some 
Belgian missionaries who are among the great landlords of 
Suiyuan. They own one vast estate of 20,000 vipit, and an- 
other of some 5,000 7 JWU of land near Tingpien, on the Great 
Wall. After the Red Army occupied Tingpien, one side of 
the Belgians’ property lay adjacent to Soviet territory and 
the other side was held by White troops. The Reds did not 
attempt to expropriate the Belgians’ land, but made a 
“treaty” in which they guaranteed to protect the church 
property, provided the priests permitted them to organize 
anti-Japanese societies among the tenants (in reality vir- 
tually serfs) who tilled the land of this big Catholic mis- 
sionary fiefdom. Another stipulation of the curious agree- 
ment provided that the Belgians would dispatch a message 
from the Chinese Soviet Government to Premier Blum, con- 
gratulating him on the triumph of the People’s Front. 

There had been a series of raids by vihi-thmi near Ho- 
lienwan, and one village only a short distance away had been 
sacked two nights before I arrived. A band had crept up to 
the place just before dawn, overpowered and killed the lone 
sentry, and had then brought up bunches of dry brushwood, 
and set fire to the huts in which about a dozen Pvcd soldiers 
were sleeping. As the Reds had run out, blinded by tlie 
smoke, the mm~fxian had shot them down and seized their 
guns. Then they had joined with a gang of some 400, most 
of them armed by the Kuomintang general, Kao Kuci-tzu, 
who were raiding down from the noixh and bmuing towns 
and villages. The zSth Army had sent a battalion out to at- 
tempt to round them up, and the day I left Holienwan these 
young v^arriors came back after a successful chase. 

The battle had occurred only a few U from Holienwan, 



^^8 BACK TO PAO AN 

which the White-bandits were in fact preparing to attack. 
Some peasants had discovered the vim-fiiaii lair in the inner 
mountains and, acting on this information, the Reds had di- 
vided into three columns, the centre one meeting the bandits 
in a frontal clash. The issue was decided when the two flank- 
ing columns of Reds closed in and surrounded the enemy. 
Some forty mm-thian were killed, and sixteen Reds, while 
many on both sides were wounded. The inin-t'iian were en- 
tirely disarmed, and their two chieftains taken captive. 

We passed the battalion returning with their captives as 
we rode back towards Shensi. A big welcome had been or- 
ganized in the villages, and the peasants lined the road to 
cheer the victorious troops. Peasant Guards stood holding 
their long red-tasselled spears in salute, and the Young Van- 
guards sang Red songs to them, while girls and women 
brought refreshments, tea and fruit and hot water — all they 
had, but it creased the faces of the weary soldiers with 
smiles. They were very young, much younger than the 
front-line regulars, and it seemed to me that many who wore 
blood-stained bandages were no more than fourteen or fif- 
teen, I saw one youth on a horse, half-conscious and held up 
by a comrade on each side, who had a white bandage round 
his forehead, in the exact centre of which was a round red 
stain. 

There in the midst of this column of youngsters, who 
carried rifles almost as big as themselves, marched the two 
bandit chieftains. One of them was a grizzled middle-aged 
peasant, and you wondered whether he felt ashamed, being 
led by these warriors all young enough to be his sons. Yet 
there was something rather splendid about his fearless bear- 
ing, and I thought that he was, after all, possibly a poor 
peasant like the rest, perhaps one who had also believed in 
something when he fought them, and it was regrettable that 
he was, I supposed, to be killed. But Fu Chin-kuei shook his 
head when I asked him. 



LIFE IN PAO AN 399 

“We don’t kill captured inin-t'itan. We educate them and 
give them a chance to repent, and many of them later be- 
come good Red partisans.” 

It was fortunate that the Reds had erased this group of 
bandits, for it cleared our road back to Pao An of any men- 
ace. We made the trip from the Kansu border in five days, 
doing more than a loo li on the fifth, but though there was 
plenty of incident there was no event, and I returned to Pao 
An with nothing hanging from my trophy-belt but some 
cantaloupes and melons I had bought along the road. 




2 

Life in Pao An 

4 ¥ 

B ack in Pao An again, I settled down once more in the 
Waichiaopu — the Foreign Office — -ivhere I stayed 
through late September and half of October. I collected 
enough biographies to fill a Who's Who in Red China, and 
every morning turned up a new commander or Soviet offi- 
cial TO be interviewed. But I was becoming increasingly un- 
easy about departure; Nanking troops were pouring into 
Kansu and Shensi, and were gradually replacing the Tung- 
pei troops ev'^erjnt'here they held a front with the Reds, as 
Chiang Kai-shek made all preparations for a new “annihila- 
tion drive” from the South and the West. Unless I got out 
soon it might be impossible; the last fissure in the blockade 
might be closed, I waited anxiously for arrangements to be 
completed for me to leave. 



^oo BACK TO PAO AN 

Meanwhile life in Pao An went on tranquilly enough, 
and you would not have supposed that these people were 
aware of their imminent “annihilation.” Not far from me a 
training regiment of new recruits was quartered. They spent 
their time marching and counter-marching all day, playing 
games and singing songs. Some nights there were dramatics, 
and every night the whole town rang with song, as different 
groups gathered in barracks or in cave grottoes, yodelling 
down the valley. In the Academy the cadets were hard at 
work on a ten-hour day of study. A new mass-education 
drive was beginning in the town, even the “little devils” in 
the Waichiaopu being subjected to daily lessons in reading, 
politics, and geography. 

As for myself, I lived a holiday life, riding, bathing, and 
playing tennis. There were two courts, one set up on the 
grassy meadow, clipped close by the goats and sheep, near 
the Red Academy, the other a clay court next door to the 
cottage of Po Ku, the gangling chairman'of the North-west 
Branch Soviet Government. Here, every morning, as soon as 
the sun rose above the hills, I played tennis with three fac- 
ulty members of the Red Army Academy; the German Li 
Teh, Commissar Tsai, and Commissar Wu. The court was 
full of stones, it was fatal to run after a fast ball, but the 
games were nevertheless hotly contested. Tsai and Wu both 
spoke Russian to Li Teh, whose Chinese was fragmentary, 
while I talked to Li Teh in English and to Tsai and Wu in 
Chinese, so that we thus had a tri-lingual game. 

A more corrupting influence I had on tire community 
Was my gambling club. I had a pack of cards, unused since 
my arrival, and one day I got these out and taught Com- 
missar Tsai to play rummy. Tsai had lost an arm in battle, 
but it handicapped him very little either at tennis or cards. 
After he had learned rummy he easily beat me with one 
hand. For a while rummy was the rage. Even the women 
began snealdng up to the Waichiaopu gambling club. My 



LIFE IN PAO AN 


401 

mud k’ang became the rendezvous of Pao An’s elite, and you 
could look around at the candle-lit faces there at night and 
recognize Mrs. Chou En-lai, Mrs. Po Ku, Mrs. Kai Feng, 
Mrs. Teng Fa, and even jMrs. Mao. It set tongues wagging. 

But the real menace to Soviet morals didn’t appear till 
Pao An took up poker. Our tennis quartet started tliis, alter- 
nating nights at Li Teh’s hut and my own den of iniquity in 
the Foreign Office. Into this sinful mire we dragged such 
respectable citizens as Po Ku, Li Ko-nung, Kai Feng, Lo Fu, 
and others. Stakes rose higher and higher. One-Armed Tsai 
finally cleaned up $120,000 fi'om Chairman Po Ku in a single 
evening, and it looked as if Po Ku’s only way out was em- 
bezzlement of the State funds. We settled the matter by 
ruling that Po Ku would be allowed to draw $ 1 20,000 on the 
treasury to pay Tsai, provided Tsai would use the money to 
buy aeroplanes for the non-existent Soviet air force. It was 
all in matches, anyway — and, unfortunately, so were the 
aeroplanes Tsai bought. 

One-Armed Tsai was an interesting, lovable, good-look- 
ing lad, quick-vdtted, excitable, full of repartee and badi- 
nage. He had been a Red for a decade, having joined while 
he was a railway worker in Hunan. Later on he had gone to 
Moscow, and studied there for uvo or three years, and found 
time to fall in love with, and marry, a Russian comrade. 
Sometimes he looked ruefully at his empty sleeve and won- 
dered whether his wife wouldn’t divorce him when she saw 
his missing arm. “Don’t worry about a little thing like that,” 
Professor Wu,. who was also a returned Russian student, 
would comfort him. “If you haven’t had your posterit}’- shot 
off when you see her again you’ll be lucky.” Neyertheless, 
Tsai kept urging me to send him an artificial arm when I 
got back to the Wlfite World. 

This was only one of the impossible requests I had for 
things to be sent in. Lo Ting-yi wanted me to buy, equip, 
and man an air fleet for them from the proceeds ojf the sale 



402 BACK TO PAO AN 

of my pictures of the Reds. Hsu Hai-tung wanted a couple 
of false teeth to fill in the gap in his gums: he had fallen in 
love. Everybody had something wrong with his teeth; they 
hadn’t seen a dentist for years. But actually their fortitude 
was amazing; you never heard anybody complaining, 
though most of them were suffering from some kind of ail- 
ment, a big number especially from ulcers and other stomach 
trouble, as a result of years of a dubious diet. 

Personally I thrived on the food and put on weight, and 
my disgust at facing the unvaried menu every day did not 
prevent me from consuming embarrassing quantities of it. 
They made me the concession of graham flour unbaked 
bread, which when toasted was not bad, and occasionally I 
had pork or mutton shaslick. Besides that I lived on miUet— 
boiled millet, fried millet, baked millet, and vice versa. Cab- 
bage was plentiful, and peppers, onions, and beans. I missed 
coffee, butter, sugar, milk, eggs, and a lot of things, but I 
went right on eating millet. 

A batch of copies of the North China Daily Neivs ar- 
rived for the library one day, and I read a recipe for what 
seemed to be a very simple chocolate sponge cake. I knew 
Po Ku was hoarding a tin of cocoa in his hut, and I schemed 
that with some of this, and by substituting pig’s fat for but- 
ter, I could make that cake. Accordingly I got Li Ko-nung 
to write out a formal application to the Chairman of the 
North-west Branch Soviet Government of the Chinese So- 
viet Republic to supply me with two ounces of chocolate. 
After several days of delay, and hemming and hawing, and 
doubts and aspersions cast upon my ability to bake a cake 
anyway, and a lot of unravelling of red tape, and conflicts 
with the bureaucracy in general, we finally forced those two 
ounces of cocoa out of Po Ku, and got other materials from 
the food co-operative. But before I could mix up the batter 
my bodyguard came in to investigate, and the wretch 
dumped the cocoa on the ground. Followed more red tape, 



LIFE LN PAO AN 


403 

but finally I got the order refilled and began the great ex- 
periment. Why labour the result? Any intelligent hmisfrm 
can foresee what happened. i\ly improvised oven failed to 
function properly, the cake did not rise, and when I took it 
off the fire it was a two-inch layer of charcoal on the bot- 
tom, and a top still in a state of slimy fluidity. Hou’ever, it 
was consumed by the interested onlookers in the Waicliia- 
opu with great relish: there were too many good materials 
in it to be wasted. I lost immense face, and thereafter doc- 
ilely consumed my millet. 

Li Teh compensated by asking me to a “foreign meal” 
Muth him. He had a way of getting rice and eggs sometimes, 
and, being German, he must have his own sausages. You 
could see them stvinging in strings, dr)dng outside his door 
near the main street of Pao An. He M'as getting ready his 
winter’s supply. He also built himself a fireplace and taught 
his Chinese wife, a girl who had come with him from 
ICiangsi, how to bake. He shotved me that the materials were 
tiiere for tolerable cooking. It was only that the food co- 
operative (where our meals were cooked in common) didn’t 
know how it should be done. Mrs. Lo Ping-hui, wife of a 
Red Army commander (and the onl)’’ lily-footed woman 
who made the Long March), was chief chef of the co-opera- 
tive, and I think Li Teh’s wife had a pull with her, and that 
is how he garnered his eggs and sugar. 

But Li Teh was more than a good cook and a good 
poker-player. Who was this myster)’- man of the Chinese 
Soviet districts? Has his importance been exaggerated by 
the Kuomintang General Lo Cho-ying, M'ho, after reading 
some of Li Teh’s ■uTitings found in Kiangsi, described him 
as the “brain-trust” of the Reds? What was his connection 
with Soviet Russia? How much influence, in fact, did Russia 
e.xercise over the affairs of Red China? 




5 

, The Russian Influence 

— 

T his volume does not have as one of its primary pur- 
poses an examination of relations between the Commu- 
nist Party of China and the Communist Party of Russia, or 
the Comintern, or the Soviet Union as a whole. No adequate 
background has been provided here for such a task. But the 
book would be incomplete without some discussion of these 
organic connections, and their more significant effects on 
the revolutionary history of China. 

Certainly and obviously Russia has for the past dozen 
years been a dominating influence — and particularly among 
‘ educated youth it has been the dominating external influence 
— on Chinese thought about the social, political, economic, 
and cultural problems of the country. This has been almost 
as true, though unacknowledged, in the Kuomintang areas 
as it has been an openly glorified fact in the Soviet districts. 
Everywhere that youth has any fervent revolutionary be- 
liefs in China the impact of Marxist ideology is apparent, 
both as a philosophy and as a kind of substitute for religion. 
Among such, young Chinese, Lenin is almost worshipped, 
Stalin is the most popular f oreign leader. Socialism is taken 
for granted as the future form of Chinese society, and Rus- 
sian hterature has the largest following — Maxim Gorky’s 

404 



THE RUSSIAN* INFLUENCE 405 

works, for example, outselling all native writers except Lu 
Hsiin, who was himself a great social revolutionary. 

And all this is quite remarkable for one reason especially. 
This is that, while America, England, France, Germany, 
Japan, Italy, and other capitalist or imperialist powers hai^e 
sent thousands of political, cultural, economic, or missionary 
workers into China, actively to propagandize the Chinese 
masses with credos of their own States, yet for many years 
the Russians have not had a single school, church, or even a 
debating society in China where Marx-Leninist doctrines 
could legally be preached. Their influence, except in the 
Soviet districts, has been largely indirect. Moreover, it has 
been aggressively opposed everywhere by the Kuomintang. 
Yet few who have been in China during this decade, and 
conscious of the society in which they have lived, will dis- 
pute the contention that Marxism, the Russian Revolution, 
and the triumphs of the Soviet Union, are influences which 
have perhaps made more profound impressions on the Chi- 
nese people than all Christian missionary influences in this 
period. 

Contrary to the ideas of many people obsessed with the 
Comintern bogey, even in the Red districts the influence of 
Russia has probably been more spiritual and ideological than 
by means of direct participation in the development of the 
Chinese Soviet movement. Remember that the Chinese Com- 
munists’ adherence to the Comintern, and unity vdth the 
U.S.S.R., have always been entirely voluntary, and could 
have been liquidated at any time by the Chinese from within. 
The role of the Soviet Union for them has been most potent 
as a living example, an ideal that bred hope and faith. Soviet 
Russian experience has been the fire and forge that helped 
anneal in them the steel-like qualities of heroic character 
that many people had not supposed Chinese possessed. The.sc 
Reds stoutly believe that the Chinese revolution is not isO' 
latcd, and that hundreds of millions of workers, not only in 



4o6 back to pao an 

Russia, but throughout the world, are anxiously watching 
them, and when the time comes will emulate them, even as 
they themselves have emulated the comrades in Russia. In 
the day of Marx and Engels it may have been correct to say 
that “the workers have no country,” but these Chinese Com- 
munists today believe that, besides their own little bases of 
proletarian rule, they have a mighty fatherland of their own 
in the Soviet Union. These earnests have been a tremendous 
source of encouragement and revolutionary nourishment 
to them. I . 

“The Soviet Government in China,” reads the Constitu- 
tion adopted at the first All-China Soviet Congress, “declares 
its readiness fo form a revolutionary united front with the 
world proletariat and all oppressed nations, and proclawis 
the Soviet Union, the land of proletarian dictatorship, to be 
its loyal ally." How much the words italicized meant to the 
Chinese Soviets, which in truth most of the time were com- 
pletely isolated geographically, economically, and politi- 
cally, is hard to understand for any Westerner who has 
never known a Chinese Communist. 

But I saw it, and heard it, and felt it. This idea of having 
behind them such a great ally — even though it has been less 
and less validated by any demonstrations of positive support 
from the Soviet Union — is of primary importance to the 
morale of the Chinese Reds. It has imparted to their struggle 
the universality of a religious cause, and they deeply cherish, 
it. When they shout, “Long live the World Revolution!” 
and “Proletarians of All Lands, Unite!” it is an idea that per- 
meates all their teaching and faith, and in it they reaffirm 
their allegiance to the dream of a Socialist world brother- 
hood. 

It seemed to me that these concepts had already shown 
that they could change Chinese behaviour. I never suffered 
from any “anti-foreignism” in the Reds’ attitude towards 
me. They were certainly anti-imperialist, and an American 



THE RUSSIAN INFLUENCE 407 

or European capitalist might have been uncomfortable 
among them, but no more so than a Chinese landlord or a 
Shanghai comprador. Racial prejudice seemed to have been 
thoroughly sublimated in class antagonism that knew no na- 
tional boundaries. Even their anti-Japanese agitation was not 
directed against the Japanese on a racial basis. In their propa- 
ganda the Reds constantly emphasized that they opposed 
only the Japanese .militarists, capitalists, and ocher “Fascist 
oppressors,” and that the Japanese masses were their poten- 
tial allies. Indeed, they derived great encouragement from 
that conviction. This raising of the level of national preju- 
dice to a higher plane of antagonism was no doubt to a con- 
siderable degree traceable to the education in Russia of 
scores of the Chinese Red leaders, who had attended Sun 
Yat-sen University, or the Eastern Toilers’ University, or 
the Red Academy, or some other school for training inter- 
national cadres of Communism, and had returned as teachers 
to their own people. 

One example of this spirit of internationalism w'as shovTi 
in the intense interest with which the Reds followed the 
events of the Spanish civil war. Bulletins A\’erc issued in the 
press, were pasted up in the meeting-rooms of village So- 
viets, were announced to the armies at the front. Special lec- 
tures were given by the political department on the cause 
and significance of the Spanish war, and the “People’s Front” 
in Spain was contrasted with the “Um’ted Front” in China. 
Mass meetings of the populace were summoned, demonstra- 
tions wcie held, and public discussions ^\^cre encouraged. It 
V'as quite surprising sometimes to find, even far back in the 
mountains. Red farmers who knew a few rudimentary facts 
about such things as the Italian conquest of Abyssinia and 
the German-Italian invasion of Spain, dnd spoke of these 
powers as the “Fascist allies” of their enemy, Japan! Despite 
their geographical isolation, these rustics now knew much 
more about world politics, thanks to radio news and wall 



4o8 back to pao an 

newspapers and Communist lecturers and propagandists, 

than the rural population anywhere else in China. 

The strict discipline of Communist method and organi- 
zation had produced among Chinese Marxists a type of co- 
operation and a suppression of individualism which the aver- 
age “Old China Hand,” or treaty-port diehard, or mission- 
ary, who fancies he “knows Chinese psychology,” would 
find it impossible to believe in without witnessing for him- 
self. In their political life the existence of the individual was 
an atomic pulse in the social whole, the mass, and must bend 
to its will, either consciously in the role of leadership, or un- 
consciously as part of the material demiurge. There have 
been disputes and internecine struggles among the Commu- 
nists, of course, but none of them has been severe enough to 
deal a permanent injury either to the Army or the Party. 
This phenomenon, this “un-Chinese” solidarity, was the re- 
sult of a new conception of society as the arena of struggle 
betv^een class forces for dominance, a struggle in which the 
most coherent, most compact, most purposeful and dy- 
namic, the most consciously determined, in the end won 
victory. And this solidarity explained a good deal about the 
Communists’ .survival, if not their victory. 

Had Nanking been able at any time to split their military 
and political strength into contradictory and warring fac- 
tions, as it did with all other Opposition groups — as Chiang 
Kai-shek did vdth his own rivals for power within the Kuo- 
mintang — the task of Communist-suppression might have 
been rewarded with final success. But its attempts were fail- 
ures. For example, a few years ago Nanking hoped to utilize 
the world-wide Stalin-Trotsky controversy to divide the 
Chinese Communists, but, although so-called Chinese “Trot- 
skyites” did appear, they earned a very bad stigma as spies 
and traitons — many of them were led by the logic of their 
position to join the Blueshirts and betray former comrades 
to the police — and they never developed any important mass 



THE RUSSIAN’ INFLUENCE 409 

influence or following, and remained a curious agglomerate 
of tragic, cynical, and isolated intellectuals. To the leader- 
ship of the Communist Part)'^ they were unable to ofiEer any 
serious threat of disruption at all. 

The Reds had generally discarded much of the insincere 
ceremony of traditional Chinese etiquette, and their ps}’-- 
cholog}’’ and character were quite different from our old 
conceptions of Chinese. They were more direct, frank, sim- 
ple, undevious, and scientific-minded. They rejected much 
of the old Chinese philosophy that was the basis of what was 
once Chinese civilization, and most important of all, perhaps, 
'they were implacable enemies of the old Chinese familism.^ 
Most of the time I felt as completely at ease in their com- 
pany as if I were with some of my own countrj-men. 

With this zealous adoration of the Soviet Union there 
has naturally been a lot of copying and imitating of foreign 
ideas, institutions, methods, and organizations. The Chinese 
Red Army is constructed on Russian militar}' lines, and 
much of its tactical knowledge derives from Russian experi- 
ence. Social organizations in general follow the pattern laid 
down by Russian Bolshevism. Many Red songs have been 
put to Russian music, and are widely sung in*rhe Soviet dis- 
tricts. So-wei-ai — Chinese for Soviet — is only one example 
of many words transliterated directly from Russian into 
Chinese. 

But in all this borrowing there was much adaptation; few 
Russian ideas or institutions survived without drastic changes 
to suit the milieu in which they operated. The empirical 
process of a decade eliminated indiscriminate wholesale im- 
portations, and also resulted in the introduction of features 
in the Soviet system that are peculiarly Chinese. A process of 

^ Of course, here I do not speak of the peasant masses as a whole, 
but only of a thorougUy Communist vanguard. But even among the 
Sovictized peasantry, mental attitudes were in striking contrast with 
those described, for e.xample, in Arthur H. Smith’s Chinese Charac- 
teristics. 



410 BACK TO PAO AN 

imitation and adaptation of the West has, or course, been go- 
ing on in the bourgeois world of China, too— for there is 
very little left even of poetry in the ancient feudal heritage, 
that “scrap material of a great history” as Spengler calls jt, 
which is of much value in building either a modern bourgeois 
or a Socialist society capable of grappling with the vast new 
demands of the country today. Two ova have simultane- 
ously shaped within the womb of Old China, and both have , 
been fertilized from abroad. Thus it is significant, for ex- 
ample, that while the Reds leaned heavily on Russia for or- 
ganizational methods with youth. Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek used not only Italian bombing-planes to destroy them, 
but also borrowed from the Y.A'I.C.A. in building his anti- 
Communist New Life Movement. 

And finally, of course, the political ideology, tactical 
line, and theoretical leadership of the Chinese Communists 
had been under the close guidance, if not positive direction, 
of the Communist International. 

Great benefits undoubtedly accrued to the Chinese Reds 
from sharing the collective experience of the Russian Revo- 
lution, and from the leadership of the Comintern. But it is 
also true that the Comintern could be held responsible for 
serious reverses suffered by the Chinese Communists in the 
anguish of their growth. 



4 

Chinese Communism and the Comintern. 



I T IS possible to divide the history of Sino-Russian rela- 
tions from 1923 to 1937 roughly into three periods. The 
first, from 1923 to 1927, was a period of de ■■facto alliance 



THE COMINTERN 


4ii 


between the Soviet Union and the National Revolutionaries, 
consisting of strange bedfellows aligned under the banners 
of the Kuomintang and the Communist parties, and aiming 
at the overthrow by revolution of the then extant govern- 
ment of China, and the achievement of China ’s.independence 
from foreign imperialism. This enterprise ended with the 
triumph of the Right-wing Kuomintang, the founding of 
the Nanking government, a compromise with imperialism 
and the sev^erance of Sino-Russian relations. 

From 1927 to 1933 there was a period of isolation of 
Russia from China, and of complete insulation by Nanking 
against Russian influence. Tliis era closed when Moscow re- 
sumed diplomatic relations with Nanking late in 1933. The 
/third period began with a lukewarm Nanking-Aloscow rap- 
procbevient, embarrassed considerably b)’- the continued 
heavy civdl war betw^een Nanking and the Chinese Commu- 
nists. It was to end dramatically early in 1937, when a partial 
reconciliation would be effected between the Communists 
and the Kuomintang, with new possibilities opened up for 
Sino-Russian co-operation. But the Communist serenade was 
still falling on deaf Kuomintang ears udien I was with the 
Reds, and this new period can be reserv^ed for discussion in 
its proper setting farther on. 

The three periods of Sino-Russian relationship men- 
tioned above accurately reflect also the changes that have 
taken place in the character of the Comintern during recent 
years, and its stages of transition. It is impossible here to 
enter into the dialectics of the e.xtremely complex series of 
causes, domestic and international, which have brought 
about these changes, both in the Soviet Union and in the 
Comintern, but it is pertinent to see how in the main they 
affected, and were affected by, the Chinese Revolution, 

As ev’-eryone who has studied this subject knovv^s, the 
crisis of the Chinese Revmlution coincided with a crisis in 
Russia, and in the Comintern, expressed in the struggle be- 
tween Trotskyism and Stalinism for theoretical and practical 



^12 ' BACK TO PAO AN 

control of the forces of world revolution. Had Stalin not 
waited till 1924 to advance his slogan, “socialism in one 
country,” had the issue been fought out and had he been 
able to dominate the Comintern before then, quite possibly 
the “intervention” in China might never have begun. Such a 
speculation in any case is idle. When Stalin did develop his 
fight, the line in China had already been cast. 

The active military, political, financial, and intellectual 
collaboration given to the Chinese Nationalist Revolution 
was until 1926 under the direction chiefly of Zinoviev, who 
was chairman of the Communist International. Until then 
Stalin’s adherents had not yet decisively overpowered the 
Trotsky theory of “permanent revolution.” But from early 
1926 onward Stalin became chiefly responsible for the affairs 
and policies of the Comintern as well as the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union, and it will nowhere be disputed 
that he has tightened his grasp on both organizations ever 
since. 

Stalin led the Comintern which gave the Chinese Com- 
munists their tactical line and “directives” throughout 1926, 
and on through the catastrophe of the spring of 1927. Dur- 
ing these fateful months, in which disaster gathered like a 
mighty typhoon above the heads of the Chinese Commu- 
nists, Stalin’s line was subjected to continuous bombardment 
from the Opposition, dominated by Trotsky, Zinoviev, and 
Kamenev. While he had been Comintern chairman, Zinoviev 
had fully supported the line of Communist co-operation 
with the Kuomintang, but he violently attacked this same 
line as carried out by Stalin. Particularly after Chiang Kai- 
shek’s first “treachery” — the abortive attempt at a coup 
d'etat in Canton in 1926 — Zinoviev predicted an inevitable 
counter-revolution, in which the national bourgeoisie would 
compromise vdth imperialism and turn traitor to the masses. 

At least a year before Chiang Kai-shek’s second and suc- 
cessful coup d'etat, Zinoviev began demanding the separa- 



THE COMINTERN 


413 

tion of the Communists from the Kuomintang, “the party of 
the national bourgeoisie,” which he realized was incapable of 
carrying out the two main tasks of the revolution — anti- 
imperialism, i.e., the overthrow of foreign domination of 
China, and “anti-feudalism,” or the destruction of the land- 
lord-gentry rule in rural China. Just as early Trotsky began 
urging the formation of Soviets, and an independent Chinese 
Red Army. The Opposition in general foretold the failure 
of the “bourgeois-democratic” revolution — all they hoped 
for in this period — if Stalin’s line was continued. And this 
prophecy was fulfilled. 

There is, however, abundant reason to believe that had 
the Opposition’s objection been made the basis of an early 
Jacobin policy in China the tragedy would have been even 
more severe. Trotsky’s theoretical criticisms were scintillat- 
ing and his advice had some connection with the actual pe- 
culiarities of the situation. But not, as often, very much. 
Certainly his Problems of the Chhiese Revolution, which 
contains most of his remarks on the period, is a loosely ar- 
gued work, full of an insouciant disregard for the objective 
limitations of the living situation at that time. It clearly sug- 
gests that the only alternative he had to offer to the Comin- 
tern policy, which ended in catastrophe, was a policy which 
would have ended in a much earlier and more complete 
catastrophe. 

Stalin defended himself, after the debacle, by ridiculing 
as non-Marxist the Trotskyist contentions that the tactical 
line of the Comintern had been the main cause of the failure. 
“Comrade Kamenev,” declared Stalin, “said that the policy 
of the Communist International was responsible for the de- 
feat of the Chinese Revolution, and that we ‘bred Cavaigners 
in China.’ . . . How can it be asserted that the tactics of a 
party can abolish or reverse the relation of class forces? 
What are we to say of people who forget the relation of 
class forces in time of retmlution, and who try to explain 



414 BACK TO PAO AN 

everything by the tactics of a party? Only one thing can be 

said of such people — ^that they have abandoned Marxism.” 

It i^, in fact, hard for any candid student of the whole 
epoch to escape the conclusion that the Trotskyists greatly 
exaggerated the importance of Comintern mistakes, while 
they minimized the overwhelmingly adverse factors in the 
objective situation. They seemed far more interested in 
foreingr from the Comintern’s errors new shells for their ar- 
tillery barrage against Stalin than they were in the immedi- 
ate fate of China. Their assault was, anyway, unsuccessful. 
Tire Party as a whole remained convinced of Stalin’s com- 
petence. With the failure of the Chinese Revolution, cou- 
pled with the earlier destruction of Communist regimes in 
Bavaria and Hungary, as well as the general defeat of the 
Comintern hopes throughout the countries of the East, the 
Party grew weary of adventures afar, and was ready to turn 
to construction at home, Stalin triumphed. 

It is tedious here to enter further into Stalin-Trotsky 
polemics. The important thing is that Stalin won, and his 
policy dominated the future activities of the Comintern in 
China. After 1927 these were for a while almost nil. Russian 
organs in China were closed, Russian Communists were 
killed or driven from the country, the flow of financial, 
military, and political help from Russia ceased, and the Chi- 
nese Communist Party was thrown into great confusion, and 
for a time lost contact with the Comintern. The Soviet 
movement and the Chinese Red Army began spontaneously , 
wider purely Chinese leadership, and they did not, in fact, 
get much applause from Russia till after the Sixth Congress, 
m-hen the Communist International gave its post-natal sanc- 
tion. 

The role of the Comintern in the Chinese Revolution 
since then has been colossally magnified in the anti-Conimu- 
nist press. Some organs were, it is true, covertly restored; 
delegates were sent to a few big cities to contact Chinese 



THE COMINTERN 415 

Comniunists; Chinese students continued to be educated in 
Russia and secretly return to carr)’^ on revolutionary work; 
and a little money dribbled in. But it became utterly impos- 
sible for Russia to have any direct physical connection what- 
ever with the Red areas, which had no seaport and were en- 
tirely surrounded by a ring of hostile troops. Whereas in the 
past there had been scores of Comintern workers in China, 
there Avere now two or three, often almost isloated from 
society as a whole, seldom able to risk a stay of more than a 
few months. Whereas millions of dollars had formerly gone 
to Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists, nov'' a thousand or so at a 
time trickled in to the Reds. And whereas the whole Soviet 
Union had backed the great revolution of 1925-1927, the 
Chinese Communist movement was now aided only by a 
Comintern which could no longer command the vast re- 
sources of the “base of the world revolution,” but had to 
limp along as a kind of poor stepchild which might be offi- 
cially disinherited whenever it did anything malaprop. 

Actually, the financial help given to the Chinese Reds by 
Moscoav or the Comintern during this decade seems to have 
been amazingly small. When the Noulens were arrested in 
Shanghai in 1932 and convicted in Nanking as chief Far 
Eastern agents of the Comintern, the complete evidence 
Avhich the police produced showed that total out-payments 
for the whole Orient (not just China) had not at most ex- 
ceeded the equivalent of about U.S. $ 1 5,000 per month. This 
is a trifle compared with the vast sums poured into China to 
support Japanese and Nazi-Fascist propaganda.^ It is rather 
pitiful also in contrast, for example, with America’s $50,- 
000,000 Wheat Loan to Nanking in 1933 — the proceeds of 
which Avere of deciswe value to Chiang Kai-shek’s ciAul v^ar 
against the Reds, according to reports of foreign military 
observers. 

^ Japanese propaganda funds for North China alone, for example, 
in 1936 exceeded $2,000,000. 



BACK TO PAO AN 


416 

America, England, Germany, and Italy sold Nanking 
great quantities of aeroplanes, tanks, guns, and munitions, to 
destroy the Chinese Soviets, but they of course sold none to 
the Reds. The American Army released many officers to 
train the Chinese air force, which demolished hundreds of 
towns in Red China, and Italian and German instructors ac- 
tually led some of the most destructive bombing expeditions 
themselves — just as they do in Spain today. To Chiang Kai- 
shek’s aid Germany sent its ablest general. Von Seeckt, and 
after him Von Falkenhausen, with a big staff of Prussian 
officers, who improved Nanking’s technique of annihilation. 
In view of these well-known facts it seemed to me rubbish 
to assert that Russia had been propping up the Chinese Reds. 
On the contrary, quite clearly Chiang Kai-shek was propped 
up for nearly ten years by the important aid which the for- 
eign powers gave to him but denied the Reds. 

It may be said categorically — and I believe no foreign 
military expert of intelligence can disagree with the state- 
ment — that the Chinese Reds fought with less foreign help 
than any army in modern Chinese history. 



That Foreign Brain-Trust 

^ 

fact is that there was not a single foreign adviser ac- 
A. tually with the Red Army during the first five years of 
its existence — years in which it built up the Soviets, created 
a disciplined revolutionary movement, and , increased its 
forces by the process of demobilizing and disarming its en- 



THAT FOREIGN BRAIN-TRUST 


417 

emy. Not until 1933 did Li Teh' appear in the Kiangsi Soviet 
districts as a German volunteer, subsequently to take a high 
position both politically and militarily. For more than three 
years he was the only foreigner actually with the Red Army, 

About the only other important foreign military help of 
any kind these Communists received came from a Comin- 
tern-led advisory committee, which for a while functioned 
in Shanghai, It was of great value in keeping the Reds in- 
formed on political and military movements of the enemy, 
and in co-ordinating tactics and strategy. It maintained con- 
tact with Juichin by radio and through the Reds’ own courier 
service, and it evidently functioned more efficiently than 
any organization Chiang Kai-shek ever managed to set up 
within the Soviets. 

Despite the insignificance of this foreign influence, sev- 
eral responsible Communists in the Northwest apparently 
felt that its advice had been to a great extent responsible for 
two costly mistakes in the Kiangsi Red republic. These 
events were of utmost importance in the last days of Kiangsi. 
The first, as Mao Tse-tung pointed out, was the failure of 
the Red Army to unite with the 19th Route Army, when 
the latter arose in revolt against Nanking in the autumn 
of 1933. 

The 19th Route Army, commanded by Generals Chen 
Ming-hsiu, Ts’ai T’ing-k’ai and Chiang Kuang-nai, had made 
the heroic defence of Shanghai against the Japanese invasion 
there in 1932, and had demonstrated its strong national- 
revolutionary character. Transferred to Fukien after the 
Shanghai Truce it gradually became a centre of political 
opposition to Nanking’s “non-resistance” policy. Following 
Nanking’s negotiation of the humiliating Tangku Truce 
with Japan, the 19th Route Army leaders set up an inde- 
pendent government, and started a movement for a demo- 
cratic republic and the destruction of Chiang Kai-shek’s 
regime. 



BACK TO PAO AN 


418 

Now the 19th Route Army was one of the few Kuomin- 
tang military units never defeated by the Reds, and they had 
great respect for its fighting ability. Composed mostly of 
Cantonese, it really reflected in its political character a 
loosely organized Left-Wing opposition movement. It was 
the main military support of several factions on the periph- 
ery of the Kuomintang, led b)'^ the Shihhui Minchu Tang, 
the Chinese Social Democrats. 

Sent to Fukien to participate in Communist suppression 
late in 1932, the 19th Route Army leaders instead quickly 
built up a base of their own from which to oppose Chiang 
Kai-shek. They entered into a non-aggression agreement 
with the Reds, and proposed an anti-Nanking, anti-Japanese 
alliance, along much the same lines as was later on to be 
evolved in the North-west between the Manchurian, the 
North-western and Communist armies. Most of the leaders of 
the Chinese Soviets, as well as the Red Army, were then 
quite sympathetic with the 19th Route Anny. They were 
prepared to move their main forces into Fukien, develop a 
strong flank attack on Nanking’s troops, and in general give 
the 19th Route Army full military and political support. 
But for various reasons that line was not carried out. 

For one thing, the advisory committee did not anticipate 
Chiang Kai-shek’s swift move against the Fukien armies, nor 
that the latter would collapse so quickly. Another argument 
against positive support of Fukien was that politically it was 
too confused and heterogeneous, with its Social Democratic 
leadership vague about its one revolutionary aim: resistance 
against Japan. The Communists seem to have been divided 
among themselves over the Fukien question. It may be rele- 
vant to recall that the lessons of the German disaster had 
apparently not yet been fully appreciated, and Communists 
everywhere still regarded the compromises necessary for 
genuine co-operation with Social Democrats, even against 



THAT FOREIGN BRAIN-TRUST 419 

the common enemy of Fascism, with considerable repug- 
nance. 

In any case, for those reasons, and others more compli- 
cated, the Communists failed to make an effective alliance 
with the Fukien insurrection. Instead of co-operating with 
the 19th Route Armj'^ the Reds themselves withdrew their 
main forces from the Fukien border to western Kiangsi, and 
left Chiang Kai-shek’s flank almost entirely free. Thus en- 
abled to descend from Chekiang into neighbouring Fukien 
with little impediment, the Generalissimo struck before the 
19th Route Army was prepared militarily or politically, and 
quickly quashed the insurgents. The Reds consequently lost 
their strongest potential allies. There is no doubt that this 
elimination of the 19th Route Army very much facilitated 
the task of destroying the southern Soviets, to which Chiang 
Kai-shek stance turned with a new confidence early in 1954. 

The second serious mistake of the Reds was made in the 
planning of strategy and tactics to meet Chiang’s new offen- 
sive — the Fifth Campaign. In previous campaigns the Reds 
had triumphed by reliance on their superiority in maneuver- 
ing warfare, and their ability to take the initiative from 
Chiang Kai-shek in strong swift concentrations, and surprise 
attacks. Positional warfare and regular fighting had always 
played minor roles in their operations. But in the Fifth Cam- 
paign, according to Red commanders to whom I talked, Li 
Teh insisted upon radical changes to meet Chiang’s new 
strategy. He planned a large-scale defensive on the pivot of 
positional warfare, relegating partisan and guerrilla tactics to 
auxiliary tasks, and somehow won acceptance for his scheme 
against (so I was told) unanimous opposition of the Red 
military council. 

Li Teh was undoubtedly an exceptionally able military 
tactician and strat^egist. During the World War he distin- 
guished himself with the German Army, and later on he had 



420 BACK TO PAO AN 

been a commander in Russia’s Red Army, and attended Mos- 
cow’s first Red Army Academy. As a German the Reds also 
respected his analysis of the strategy and tactics which the 
German advisers had recommended to Generalissimo Chi- 
ang. Subsequent events proved that faith to be correct. 
Nanking generals, when they found some of Li Teh’s writ- 
ings interpreting their tactics, admitted with amazement that 
he had accurately anticipated every stage of the offensive. 
Nevertheless, the Red commanders to whom I talked felt 
that the main reason for their defeat in the Fifth Campaign 
was the change in their owu tactics and I suppose naturally 
enough held Li Teh chiefly responsible. 

But whatever errors of judgment Li Teh may have made 
there is little question that his long experience with Chinese 
fighting methods, and on Chinese terrain, makes him today 
one of the best qualified Occidental military authorities on 
China. And incidentally, the personal courage and stoic hero- 
ism of a man who endured the severe hardships of the Long 
March — much worse for a foreigner than for a Chinese — 
must command the admiration of people of any political be- 
lief, and remain a challenge to arm-chair revolutionaries all 
over the world. 

He had stomach complaints, and was badly in need of a 
dentist, but his real problem was to find a pair of shoes large 
enough for his enormous number elevens. There did not 
seem to be any shoes that big in China. Deeply intellectual, 
and highly sensitive, he had lived for years without any con- 
tact with foreigners, most of the time without even books 
to read. When I was in Pao An he seemed delighted to have 
got hold of a copy of the huge China Year Book, which he 
carefully digested from cover to cover, including its innu- 
merable tables of statistics — a feat constituting one of the 
few things he could boast in common with the Year Book 
editor, H. G. W. Woodhead, C.B.E. This blue-eyed fair- 
haired Ar}'-an did not speak a word of Chinese when he first 



THAT FOREIGN BRAIN-TRUST 42 1 

immersed himself alone with his Oriental comrades, and he 
had to conduct all his com'^ersations in German, Russian, 
and French. 

It is almost impossible to believe that under any genius of 
command the Reds could have emerged victorious against 
the heartbreaking odds which faced them throughout the 
year of the Fifth Campaign. It was not the phenomenon of 
foreign support on the side of the Reds, but its presence in 
a major degree on the side of the Kuomintang, that charac- 
terized the last desperate struggle of the Kiangsi Soviet re- 
public. The situation was just the opposite of the picture 
presented in anti-Red propaganda. 

It is important to discuss all this, and candidly to note the 
role of foreign help given the Chinese Soviets at that time, 
and especially its relative insignificance, in order to get a 
correct picture of the internal difficulties of the Chinese 
Communists, For as seen from this evidence it is quite clear 
that they were not “officered by Russian Bolsheviks,” “met. 
cenaries of Moscow rubles,” or “puppet troops of Stalin,” 
nor did they fit the other phrases frequently repeated in the 
anti-Communist press. Chinese and foreign newspapers dur- 
ing the anti-Red wars used regularly to report how many 
“corpses of Russian officers” were found on the battlefield 
after a Kuomintang attack on the Reds. So effective was this 
propaganda that many non-Communist Chinese really 
thought of the Chinese Red Army as some kind of foreign 
invasion. 

So much for Kiangsi. During the next two years of the 
Long March the Reds were almost entirely cut off from 
contact even with their own Party members in the coastal 
cities of China, and the Comintern only infrequently got 
into direct communication with the Red Army. Wang Ming, 
the Chinese Party’s chief delegate in Moscow, must have 
found it very difficult;^at times to get accurate information 
even on the location of the main forces of the Red Army for 



422 BACK TO BAO AN ' 

his reports to the Comintern, and some of his articles in 
Jnprecorr seemed to reflect that. Incidentally, I happened to 
be in Pao An one day when some copies of Inprecorr ar- 
rived, and I saw Lo Fu, the American-educated secretary of 
the Central Committee of the Party, eagerly devouring 
them. He mentioned casually that he had not seen an In- 
precorr for nearly three years! 

And not until September, 1936, while I was still with the 
Reds, did the detailed account of the proceedings of the 
Seventh Congress of the Communist International, held just 
a year previously, finally reach the Red capital of China. It 
was these reports which brought to the Chinese Communists 
for the first time the fully developed thesis of the interna- 
tional anti-Fascist united front tactics — ^tactics which were 
to guide them in their policy during the exciting months 
ahead, when revolt was to spread throughout the North- 
west, and to shake the entire Orient. And once more the 
Comintern was to assert its will in the affairs of China, in a 
manner that sharply affected tlie development of the revo- 
lution. 

But I was to view this episode from the sidelines again in 
Peiping. 


4 

6 

Farewell to Red China 




T wo interesting things happened before I left Pao An. 

On October 9, radio messages fi;om Kansu reached us, 
telling of the successful junction at Huining of the vanguard 



FAREWELL TO RED CHINA 423 

of the Fourth Red Army with Ch’en Keng’s First Division 
of the First Army Corps. A few days later Ch’en Keng and 
all the important officrs of the First Front Army were hold- 
ing a joyous reunion in Kansu with the leaders of the Second 
and Fourth Front Armies, including Chu Teh, Hsu Hsiang- 
ph’ien, Ho Lung, Chang Kuo-t’ao, Hsiao K’eh, and many 
others. The whole of north-eastern Kansu had fallen to the 
Reds, and a column of the Fourth Front Army was moving 
across the Yellow River into the panhandle of north-western 
Kansu. Government opposition had momentarily been over- 
whelmed. 

All the regular Red Army forces were now concentrated 
in North-west China, with good lines of communications 
established. Orders for winter uniforms poured into the fac- 
tories of Pao An and Wu Ch’i Chen. The combined forces 
of the Three Armies now numbered beuveen eighty and 
ninety thousand seasoned, well-equipped warriors. Celebra- 
tions and rejoicing were held in Pao An and throughout the 
Soviet districts. The long period of suspense during the 
fighting in south Kansu was ended. Everyone now felt a new 
confidence in the future. With the whole of the best Red 
troops in China concentrated in a big new territory, and 
near by another 100,000 sympathetic troops of the Tungpei 
(Manchurian) Army, of whom they had come to think as 
allies, the Reds now believed that their proposals for a 
United Front would be heard with keener interest at 
Nanking. 

The second important event was an interview I had with 
Mao Tse-tung, just before I left, in which, for the first time, 
he indicated concrete terms on the basis of which the Com- 
munists would welcome peace with the Kuomintang, and 
co-operation to resist Japan. Some of these terms had al- 
ready been announced in a manifesto issued by the Commu- 
nist Party in August. In my conversation with Mao, I asked 
him to explain the reasons for this new policy. 



424 BACK TO PAO AN 

“First of all,” he began, “the seriousness of Japanese’ ag- 
gression: it is becoming more intensified every day, and is 
so formidable a menace that before it all the forces of China 
must unite. Besides the Communist Party there are other 
parties and forces in China, and the strongest of these is the 
Kuomintang. Without its co-operation our strength at pres- 
ent is insufficient to resist Japan in war. Nanking must par- 
ticipate. The Kuomintang and the Communist Party are the 
two main political forces in China, and if they continue to 
fight now in civil war the effect will be unfavourable for 
the anti-Japanese movement. 

“Secondly, since August, 1935, the Communist Party has 
been urging, by manifesto, a union of all parties in China for 
the purpose of resisting Japan, and to this programme the 
entire populace has responded with sympathy, notwith- 
standing the fact that the Kuomintang has continued its at- 
tacks upon us. 

“The tliird point is that many patriotic elements even in 
the Kuomintang now favour a reunion with the Communist 
Party. Anti-Japanese elements even in the Nanking Govern- 
ment, and Nanldng’s own armies, are today ready to unite 
because of the peril to our national existence. 

“These are the main characteristics of the present situa- 
tion in China, and because of them we are obliged to recon- 
sider in detail the concrete formula under which such co- 
operation in the national liberation movement can become 
possible. The fundamental point of unity which we insist 
upon is the national liberation anti-Japanese principle. In or- 
der to realize it we believe there must be established a na- 
tional defence democratic Government. Its main tasks must 
be to resist the foreign invader, to grant popular rights to 
the masses of the people, and to intensify the development 
of the country’s economy. 

“We will therefore support a parliamentary form of 
representative Government, an anti-Japanese salvation Gov- 



FAREWELL TO RED CHINA 425 

ernment, a Government which protects and supports all 
popular patriotic groups. If such a republic is established, 
the Chinese Soviets will become a part of it. We will realize 
in our areas measures for a democratic parliamentary form 
of Government.” 

“Does that mean,” I asked, “that the laws of such a [dem- 
ocratic] Government would also apply in Soviet districts?” 

Mao replied in the affirmative. He said that such a Gov- 
ernment should restore and once more realize Sun Yat-sen’s 
final will, and his three “basic principles” during the Great 
Revolutions, which were: alliance with the U.S.S.R. and 
those countries which treat China as an equal; union with 
the Chinese Communist Party; and fundamental protection 
of the interests of the Chinese working class. 

“If such a movement develops in the Kuomintang,” he 
continued, “we are prepared to co-operate with and support' 
it, and to form a United Front against imperialism such as- 
existed in 19257/927. We are convinced that this is the only 
way left to save our nation.” 

“Is there any innnediate cause for the new proposals?” 
I inquired. “They must certainly be regarded as the most 
important decision in your Party’s history in a decade.” 

“The immediate causes,” Mao explained, “are the severe 
new demands of Japan, capitulation to which must enor- 
mously handicap any attempts at resistance in the future, 
and the popular response to this deepening threat of Japa- 
nese invasion in the form of a great people’s patriotic move- 
ment. These conditions have in turn produced a change in 
attitude among certain elements in Nanking. Under the cir- 
cumstances it is now possible to hope for the realization of 
such a policy as we propose. Had it been offered in this form 
a year ago, or earlier, neither the country nor the Kuomin- 
tang tvould have been prepared for it. 

“At present negotiations are being conducted. While the 
Communist Party has no great positive hopes of persuading 



426 BACK TO PAO AN 

Nanking to resist Japan, it is nevertheless possible. As long 
as it is, the Communist Party will be ready to co-operate in 
all necessary measures. If Chiang Kai-shek prefers to con- 
tinue the civil war, the Red Army will also receive him.” 

In effect, Mao made a formal declaration of the readi- 
ness of the Communist Party, the Soviet Government, and 
the Red Army, to cease civil war, and further attempts to 
overthrow Nanking by force, and to submit to the high 
command of a representative central Government, provided 
there was created the political framework in which the co- 
operation of other parties besides the Kuomintang would be 
possible. At this time also, though not as part of the formal 
interview, Mao indicated that the Communists would be 
prepared to make such changes in nomenclature as would 
facilitate “co-operation,” without fundamentally affecting 
the independent role of the Red Army and the Communist 
Party. Thus, if it were necessary, the Red Army would 
change its name to the National Revolutionary Army, the 
name “Soviets” would be abandoned, and the agrarian pol- 
icy would be modified during the period of preparation for 
war against Japan. During the exciting weeks that lay ahead, 
this statement^ was to have an important influence on events. 
Prior to its appearance, the Communists’ own manifestoes 
were suppressed from the public, and, among the few Nan- 
king leaders who saw them, were received with deep scepti- 
cism. With the widespread publication of a foreigner’s in- 
terview with the Communist leader himself, however, influ- 
ential groups were to become more convinced of the Com- 
munists’ sincerity. The demand for a “remarriage” of the 
two parties was to gain many new adherents — for the pro- 
posal of a cessation of the costly civil war, and the peaceful 
achievement of unity to resist the menace of Japanese con- 
quest, now appealed to all classes. 

For the full text of the interview see The China W eekly Review, 
Shanghai, November 14 and 21, 1936. ' 



FAREWELL TO RED CHINA 427 

In the middle of October, 1936, after I had been with the 
Reds nearly four months, arrangements were finally com- 
pleted for my return to the White World. It had not been 
easy. Chang Hsueh-Iiang’s friendly Tungpei troops had been 
withdrawn from nearly every front, and replaced by Nan- 
king or other hostile forces. There was only one outlet then, 
through a Tungpei division which still had a front with the 
Reds near Lochuan, a walled city a day’s motor trip north 
of Sian. 

I walked down the main street of Defended Peace for 
the last time, and the farther I got towards the gate, the more 
reluctantly I mov^ed. People popped their heads out of of- 
fices to shout last remarks. My poker club turned out en 
masse to bid the maestro good-bye, and some “little devils” 
trudged wdth me to the walls of Pao An. I stopped to take a 
picture of Old Hsii and Old Hsieh, their arms thrown round 
each other’s shoulders like schoolboys. Only Mao Tse-tung 
failed to appear; he was still asleep. 

“Don’t forget my artificial arm!” called out Tsai. 

“Don’t forget my films!” urged Lo Ting-yi. 

“We’ll be waiting for the air-fleet!” laughed Yang Shan- 
kun. 

“Send me in a wife!” demanded Li Ko-nung. 

“And send back those four ounces of cocoa,” chided 
Po Km 

The whole Red Academy was seated out in the open, 
under a great tree, listening to a lecture by Lo Fu, when I 
went past. They all came over, and we shook hands, and I 
mumbled a few words. Then I turned and forded the stream, 
waved them a farewell, and rode up quicldy with my little 
caravan. I might be the last foreigner to see any of them 
alive, I thought. It was very depressing. I felt that I was not 
going home, but leaving it. 

In five days we reached the southern frontier, and I 
waited there for three days, staying in a tiny village and eat- 



428 BACK TO PAO AN 

ing black beans and wild pig. It was a beautiful wooded 
country, alive with game, and I spent the days in the hills 
with some farmers and Red soldiers, hunting pig and deer. 
The bush was crowded with huge pheasants, and one day 
we even saw, far out of range, two tigers streaking across a 
clearing in a valley drenched with the purple-gold of au- 
tumn. The front was absolutely peaceful, and the Reds had 
only one battalion stationed here. 

On the 20th I got through no-man’s-land safely and be-- 
hind the Tungpei lines, and on a borrowed horse next day I 
rode into Lochuan, where a lorry was waiting for me. A day 
later I was in Sianfu. At the Drum Tower I jumped down 
from the driver’s seat and asked one of the Reds (who were 
wearing Tungpei uniforms) to toss me my bag. A lohg 
search, and then a longer search, while my fears increased. 
Finally there was no doubt about it. My bag was not there. 
In that bag were a dozen diaries and note-books, thirty rolls 
of film — the first pictures ever taken of the Chinese Red 
Army — and several pounds of Red magazines, newspapers, 
and documents. It had to be found! 

Excitement under the Drum Tower, while traffic police- 
men curiously gazed on a short distance away. Whispered 
consultations. Finally it was realized what had happened. 
The lorry had been loaded with gunnysacks full of broken 
Tungpei rifles and guns being sent for repairs, and my bag, 
in case of any search, had been stuffed into such a sack also. 
But back at Hsienyang, on the opposite shore of the Wei 
River, twenty miles behind us, the missing object had been 
thrown off with the other loads. The driver stared ruefully 
at the lorry. “T’^7 ma-ti,” he offered in consolation. “Rape 
its mother.” 

It was already dusk, and the driver suggested that he 
wait till morning to go back and hunt for it. Morning! 
Something warned me that morning Avould be too late. I in- 
sisted, and I finally won the argument. The lorry reversed 



FAREWELL TO RED CHINA 429 

and returned, and I stayed awake all night in a friend’s house 
in Sianfu wondering whether I would ever see that priceless 
bag again. If it were opened at Hsienyang, not only would 
all my things be lost forever, but that “Tungpei” lorr)^ and 
all its occupants would be Imai-la — finished. There were 
Nanking gendarmes at Hsienyang. 

The bag was found. But my hunch about the urgency of 
the search had been absolutely correct, for early next morn- 
ing all traffic was completely swept from the streets, and all 
roads leading into the city were lined with gendarmes and 
troops. Peasants were cleared out of their homes along the 
road. Some of the more unsightly huts were simply demol- 
ished, so that there would be nothing offensive to the eye. 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek was paying a sudden call on 
Sianfu. It would have been impossible then for our lorry to 
return over that road to the Wei River, for it skirted the 
heavily guarded aerodrome. 

This arrival of the Generalissimo made an unforgettable 
contrast with the scenes still fresh in my mind — of Mao Tse- 
tung, or Hsu Hai-tung, or Lin Piao, or P’eng Teh-huai non- 
chalantly strolling down a street in Red China. And the 
Generalissimo did not even have a price on his head. It viv- 
idly suggested who really feared the people and who trusted 
them. But even all the precautions taken to protect the Gen- 
eralissimo’s life in Sian were to prove inadequate. He had 
too many enemies among the very troops who were guard- 
ing him. 




; 4 1 = 

PART TWELVE: WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

1 

A Preface to Mutiny 



I EMERGED from Red China to find a sharpening ten- 
sion between the Tungpei (ex-Manchurian) troops of 
Young Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang, and Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek. The latter was now not only Commander- 
in-Chief of China’s armed forces, but also chairman of the 
Executive Yuan — a position comparable to that of Premier. 

The steps have been described’^ by which the Tungpei 
troops were gradually being transformed, militarily and po- 
litically, from mercenaries who had been shipped to half a 
dozen different provinces to fight the Reds, into an army 
infected by the national revolutionary anti-Japanese slogans 
of its enemy, convinced of the futility of continued civil 
war, stirred by only one exhortation, loyal to but one cen- 
tral idea — the hope of “fighting back to the old homeland,” 
of recovering Manchuria from the Japanese who had driven 
them from their homes, and abused and murdered their fam- 
ilies. These notions being directly opposed to the maxims 
then held by Nanldng, it has been told how the Tungpei 
troops, naturally enough, had found themselves with a grow- 
ing fellow feeling for the anti-Japanese Red Army. 

^ Cf. especially, Part I, “Some Han Bronzes.” 

431 



curencesdurinarh^r widened h • 

a revolt a^ai of mv f., ^^Portant oc- 

C^’ung-hsi ^ad been le jt p ^outh- 

“Element had final], /f'' near-war '^''^™'’*’’ "“n- 

''ided a tremendoMo^ ■ “"''“'^hed, butrh ’ “™P™niise 

*™ughou(: Ch,ha “ *■= ‘■no- ran®'"™ P™^ 

^ngry mobs in ^ J^panesf j”? wt 

had presented to Na i the inre ' P'"ed 

“mpensat/ons and^ “"no deLZ T’ ™‘' *P“n 
Apanese ‘C;dent“;^f «''«i 1 1 

Ung National 9 i fnoveme 

Measures of sunnr^ Association Left:- 

considerable ma« n 'r"’ ^'n strenJh^'’ stern 

JVan/cing to stiffen ^ ^>cing and 

''^^’cn, jn October ^ ''ff'tucle. This ^ exerted on 
a ?^’ equipped aJdTrTV"^ and'cN 

^^3har, began an Japan% n ^ ''""^se puppet 

'^'^cspreadpo" n^herr?"^"^" 

SnauS; ' '■”' Ci for?' ™-Sd .yf ' 
“"’hg. ,No n,obSt°o?:7”«" “ "? 

^cation”—./ . ^ standing renJv . ^crs were fnref, 

patriot;;!"^™™™™ o/theSds!!'*- ont 

Ptoposals for an\nd ^'S'''" to urne th fet 

"o™' front on th? '° "'-r. a? Communis? 

“Pt<=d by Nanfa? “™'>«>b>ty u;;?®*" of a na- 



A PREFACE TO MUTINY 435 

the anti-Japanese sentiment of the Tungpei Army was con- 
nected with the determination to stop the war against the 
Reds. Sian seems a long way off to most Chinese as well as 
to foreigners in the big treaty ports of China, and it is little 
visited by journalists. No foreign correspondent had been 
to Sian in recent months, and none had any reliable back- 
ground to the events that were to take place there — ^tvith 
one exception. That was Afiss Nym Wales, an American 
writer, who in October journeyed to Sian and interviewed 
the Young Marshal. Miss Wales accurately reported the 
rising beat of pulse in the North-west: 

“In Sianfu, the ‘Western Capital’ of China, a critical 
situation is developing in the ranks of Young Alarshal Chang 
Hsueh-liang’s bitterly anti-Japanese North-eastern Army, 
stationed here for suppression of the Reds. These troops, 
dwindled from 250,000 men in 1931 to 130,000 at present, 
are all ‘men without a country,’ homesick, sick of civil war, 
and in a high temper against the continued non-resistance 
policy of the Nanking Government towards Japan. The 
attitude of the lower rank and file might very easily be de- 
scribed as mutinous, and this feeling has permeated even to 
the high officers. This condition has given rise to rumours 
that even Chang Hsueh-liang’s previously good personal 
relations with Chiang Kai-shek have become strained, and 
that he is planning an alliance with the Red Army in an anti- 
Japanese United Front, under the direction of a National 
Defence Government. 

“The serious anti-Japanese movement in China is formu- 
lating itself not in-the various ‘incidents’ ranging from North 
to South, but here in Sianfu among the North-eastern e.xiles 
from Manchuria — as one might expect that it logically 
should. While the movement is being suppressed in other 
parts of China, in Sianfu it is under the open and enthusiastic 
leadership of Young Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang — ardently 



434 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

supported by his troops, if not compelled by them to act in 

this direction.”^ 

Reflecting on the significance of her interview with the 
Young Marshal, Miss Wales wrote:' 

“In effect, and read in relation to its background, this 
interview may be interpreted as an attempt to influence 
Chiang Kai-shek to lead active resistance , . . implying a 
threat (in his statement) that ‘only by resistance to foreign 
aggression [i.e., not by civil war] can the real unification of 
China be manifested,’ and that ‘if the Government does not 
obey the will of the people it cannot stand.’ Most significant, 
this Deputy Commander-in-Chief (second only to Chiang 
Kai-shek) said that ‘if the Communists can sincerely co- 
operate to resist the common foreign invader, perhaps it is 
possible that this problem can be settled peacefully.’ . , 

Truly mutinous assertion! But Chiang Kai-shek plainly 
underestimated the seriousness of the warning. In October 
he sent liis crack First Army as vanguard to attack the Reds 
in Kansu, and when he arrived in Sianfu it was for the pur- 
pose of completing preliminary plans for his sixth general 
offensive against the Reds. In’ Sian and Lanchow arrange- 
ments were made to accommodate over loo bombers. Tons 
of bombs arrived. It was reported that poison gas was to be 
used. This was seemingly the only explanation of Chiang’s 
queer boast that he would “destroy the remnant Red-bandits 
in a couple of weeks, or at most a month.”^ 

One thing Chiang must have understood after his Oc- ' 
tober visit to Sian. That was that the Tungpei troops were 
becoming useless in the war against the Communists. In inter- 
views with Tungpei commanders the Generalissimo could 

^ New York Sun, circa October 25, 1936. 

■ Cf. Chiang’s diary. 



A PREFACE TO MUTINY 435 

now discern a profound lack of interest in his new offensive. 
One of Chang Hsueh-liang’s staff told me later that at this 
time the Young Marshal formally presented to the General- 
issimo the programme for a national front, cessation of civil 
war, alliance with Russia, and resistance to Japan. Chiang 
Kai-shek replied, “I will never talk about this until every 
Red soldier in China is exterminated, and every Communist 
is in prison. Only then would it be possible to co-operate 
with Russia.” A little before this the Generalissimo had re- 
jected a Russian offer of a mutual-defence pact, through his 
then foreign minister, Wang Ching-wei. Time may yet 
show that no costlier mistake has been made in the modern- 
history of Chinese diplomacy. 

Now, the Generalissimo went back to his headquarters 
in Loyang and supervised preparations for his new cam- 
paign. Twenty divisions of troops were to be brought into 
the North-west if necessary. By late November over ten full 
war-strength divisions had already been concentrated near 
Tungkuan, outside the historic pass at the gateway to Shensi. 
Trainloads of shells and supplies poured into Sian. Tanks, 
armoured cars, motor transports, were prepared to move 
after them. 

But of all these plans for intensified civil war on an im- 
mense scale the public — e.xcept in the North-west — re- 
mained in ignorance. Little crept into the press about the 
North-west. The Reds had already been officially “extermi- 
nated,” and only a few “remnants” were being dispersed — 
so the official story went. Meanwhile, the Suiyuan (Inner 
Mongolian) defences -u'cre left to provincial troops — who 
put up a good fight against Japanese invaders. Not a single 
Nanking aeroplane rose to combat the Japanese planes daily 
bombing the Chinese lines. But a lively propaganda kept up 
the fiction that Nanking troops were leading die defence. 
At the same time Tokyo and Nanking exchanged assurances 
that the “local conflict” in Sui)man must not spread. A few 



436 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

central Government troops — at most two divisions— entered 
Suiyuan, to be tactically disposed in such a manner, as to 
prevent the provincial troops from really taking this “re- 
sistance” business too seriously. It was feared they might 
actually open an attack on Japanese-held territory in Chahar 
and JehoL Some Nanking troops were also arranged be- 
tween the Suiyuan army and the Reds, whom Chiang 
thought might make a drive into Suiyuan from Shensi, and 
attempt to lead a real attack on the Japanese. 

A flame of strong nationalist feeling swept through the . 
country, and the Japanese demanded the suppression of the 
National Salvation Alovement, which they held responsible 
for the anti-Japanese agitation. Nanking obliged. Seven of 
the most prominent leaders of the organization, all respect- 
able citizens, including a prominent banker, a lav/yer, edu- 
cators, and writers, were arrested. At the same time the 
Government suppressed fourteen nationally popular maga- 
zines at one stroke. Strikes in the Japanese mills of Shanghai, 
partly in patriotic protest against the Japanese invasion of 
Suiyuan, were also broken up with considerable violence by 
the Japanese, in co-operation with the Kuomintang. When 
other patriotic strikes occurred in Tsingtao, the Japanese 
landed their own marines, arrested the strikers, occupied the 
city. The marines were withdrawn only after Nanking had 
agreed virtually to prohibit all strikes in Japanese mills of 
Tsingtao in the future. 

All these happenings had further repercussions in the 
North-west. In November, under pressure from his own 
ofiicers, Chang Hsueh-liang dispatched his famous appeal to 
be sent to the Suiyuan front. “In order to control our 
troops,” this missive concluded, “we should keep our prom- 
ise to them that whenever the chance comes they will be 
allowed to carry out their desire of fighting the enemy. 
Otherwise, they will regard not only myself, but also Your 
Excellency, as a cheat, and thus will no longer obey us. 



A PREFACE TO MUTINY 


437 

Please give us the order to mobilize at least a part, if not the 
whole, of the Tungpei Army, to march immediately to 
Suiyuan as enforcements to those who are fulfilling their 
sacred mission of fighting Japanese imperialism there. If so, 
I, as well as my troops, of more than 100,000, shall follow 
Your Excellency’s leadership to the end.” The earnest tone 
of this whole letter,^ the hope of restoring an army’s lost 
prestige, were overwhelmingly evident. But Chiang rejected 
the suggestion. He still \vanted the Tungpei Army to fight 
the Reds. 

Not long afterwards, importunate, the Marshal flew his 
plane to Loyang to repeat the request in person. At this 
time also he interceded for the arrested leaders of the Na- 
tional Salvation Association. Later on, after the arrest of the 
Generalissimo, Chang Hsueh-liang recounted that conver- 
sation:" 

“ ‘Recently Generalissimo Chiang arrested 'and impris- 
oned seven of our National Salvation leaders in Shanghai. 
I asked him to release those leaders. Now, none of the 
National Salvation leaders are my friends or relatives, and 
I do not even know most of them. But I protested at their 
arrest because their principles are the same as mine. A'ly 
request that they be released was rejected. To Chiang I 
then said: “Your cruelty in dealing with the patriotic move- 
ment of the people is e.xactly the same as that of Yuan Shih- 
k’ai or Chang Tsung-chang.” 

“ ‘Generalissimo Chiang replied; “That is merely your 
viewpoint. I am the Government. My action was that of a 
revolutionary.” 

“ ‘Fellow countrymen, do you believe this?’ 

“The question was answered by an angry roar from the 
assembled thousands.” 

^ Published in Sianfu, Januarj' 2, 1937, by the Nordt-west AWican,’ 
Council. 

- A speech reported by the Hsiking Min Pao, Sianfu, December 
17, 1936. 



438 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

But Chang Hsueh-liang’s flight to Loyang at that time 
had one positive result. The Generalissimo agreed that when 
he next came to Sian he would explain- his plans and strategy 
to the Tungpei division generals in detail. The Young Mar- 
shal returned to await impatiently his superior’s second visit. 
Before Chiang arrived, however, two occurrences inter- 
vened which further antagonized the North-west. 

The first of these was the signing of the German-Japa- 
nese anti-Communist agreement, and Italy’s unofficial ad- 
herence thereto. Italy had already tacitly recognized Japan’s 
conquest of Manchuria, in return for which Japan had ac- 
knowledged Italy’s control of Abyssinia. The opening of 
Italian relations with Manchukuo had infuriated the Young 
Marshal, who had once been pals with Count Ciano, With 
receipt of this news he denounced both Ciano and Musso- 
lini, and swore to destroy Italian influence in his country. 
“This is absolutely the end of the Fascist movement in 
China!” he had exclaimed in a speech before his cadets. The 
Tungpei people now added one more complaint to their 
list, German and Italian military advisers were training 
Chiang’s army and his air force to bomb Chinese Reds. 
Were they not also furnishing Japan with all the military 
information they had about China? Had Chiang Kai-shek 
not been informed in advance, in fact, of the German-Japa- 
nese Pact, and approved of it? It was rumoured that he had. 

Then, in November also, came news of the disaster to 
Hu Tsung-nan’s famed First Army, which on the 21st suf- 
fered a severe defeat from the Reds. General Hu, ablest of 
Nanking’s tacticians, had for weeks been moving almost 
unimpeded into northern Kansu, The Reds had slowly with- 
drawn, refusing battle except in minor skirmishes. But in 
various ways they propagandized the Nanking troop's about 
the “United Front,” trying to persuade them to halt, issuing 
declarations that the Red Army would attack no anti- Japa- 
nese troops, urging the enemy to join them in resisting 



A PREFACE TO MUTINY 439 

Japan. “Chinese must not fight Chinese!” The propaganda 
was to prove highly effective. 

But General Hu concluded that the Reds were finished 
— ^weak, afraid, with no fight left in them. He recklessly 
pushed on. The Reds continued to withdraw until they had 
almost reached Holienwan. There they decided to retreat 
no further-, the enemy needed a lesson. It needed to be 
shown that the United Front also had teeth in it. Suddenly 
turning, they skilfully manoeuvred General Hu’s troops into 
a valley of loessland, surrounded them at dusk, when the 
air bombardment had ceased, and at night staged a surprise 
frontal attack, supported by bayonet charges from both 
flanks. It was zero weather, and the Reds’ bare hands were 
so cold they could not pull the caps from their hand gre- 
nades., Hundreds of them went into the enemy lines using 
their potato-masher grenades for clubs. The fierce on- 
slaught, led by the First Army Corps, resulted in the com- 
plete destruction and disarming of two infantry brigades 
and a regiment of cavalry, while thousands of rifles and 
machine-guns were captured, and one Government regi- 
ment turned over intact to join the Reds. General Hu beat 
a hasty retreat, giving up in a few days all the territory 
which he had “recovered” over a period of weeks. He sat 
down to wait for the Generalissimo’s reinforcements. 

Tire Tungpei troops chuckled among themselves. It was 
just as they had said: the Reds had more punch in them 
than ever, and this inauspicious beginning of the new cam- 
paign showed how difficult the process of annihilation was 
going- to be. A year, two years, three, and where would they 
be? Still fighting the Reds. And Japan? In occupation of 
new and greater areas of Chinese territory. Thus they rea- 
soned. But the obstinate Generalissimo, angered by the hu- 
miliation of his best army, censured General Hu and only 
became more determined to destroy his ten-year enemy. 

Into this main theatre of events Chiang Kai-shek stepped 



440 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

from his aeroplane onto the flying field of Sian on Decem- 
ber 7, 1936. 

Meanwhile, important things had happened on both the 
right and left Mdngs of the stage. Among the Tungpei com- 
manders an agreement had been reached to present a com- 
mon request for cancellation of civil war, and resistance to 
Japan. Into this agreement had come the officers of the army 
of General Yang Hu-cheng, the Pacification Commissioner 
of Shensi, who has already been described. General Yang’s 
army, of about 40,000 men, had even less interest in con- 
tinuing the war against the Reds than the Tungpei troops. 
To them it was Nanking’s war, and they saw no good reason 
for wrecking themselves against the Reds — many of whom 
were Shensi people like themselves. It was to them also a 
disgraceful war, when Japan was invading the neighbouring 
province of Suiyuan. General Yang’s troops, known as the 
Hsipei Chun, or North-west Army, had some- months previ- 
ously formed a close solidarity with the Tungpei U'oops, 
and secretly joined in the truce with the Reds. 

All this must have been known in a general way to the 
Premier-Generalissimo. Although he had no regular troops 
in Sian, a few months earlier some 1,500 of the Third Gen- 
darmes, a so-called “special service” regiment of the Blue- 
shirts, commanded by his nephew, General Chiang Hsiao- 
hsicn, who was credited with the abduction, imprisonment, 
and killing of hundreds of radicals, had arrived in the city. 
They had established espionage headquarters throughout 
the province, and begun arrests and kidnappings of alleged 
“Communist” students, political workers, and soldiers. Shao 
Li-tr.u, the Nanking-appointed governor of Shensi, was in 
control of the police force of the capital. As neither the 
Young Marshal nor Yang Hu-cheng had any troops but 
bodyguards in the city, the Generalissimo had practical 
command there. t 

This situation helped to provoke a further incident. On 


A PREFACE TO MUTINY 44 1 

the 9th, two days after Chiang’s arrival, several thousand 
students held an anti-Japanese demonstration, and started to 
march to Lintung, to present a petition to the Generalis- 
simo. Governor Shao ordered it to be dispersed. The police, 
assisted by some of Chiang Kai-shek’s gendarmes, roughly 
handled the students, and at one stage opened fire on them. 
Two students were wounded, and as they happened to be 
children of a Tungpei officer the shooting was especially 
inflammatory. Chang Hsueh-liang intervened, stopped the 
fight, persuaded the students to return to the city, and 
agreed to present their petition to the Generalissimo. In- 
furiated, Chiang Kai-shek reprimanded Chang for his “dis- 
loyalty” in trying “to represent both sides” Chiang Kai- 
shek himself wrote that he considered this incident between 
them was the immediate cause of the revolt. 

The Generalissimo’s whole staff, together with his per- 
sonal bodyguards, were with him in Sianfu. Chiang refused 
to see the Tungpei and Hsipei commanders in a group, as 
they wished, but talked to them separately, and attempted, 
by various inducements, to break their solidarity. In this 
effort he failed. One and all acknowledged him as Com- 
mander-in-Chief, but each expressed his displeasure with 
the new campaign, and all asked to be sent to the anti-Japa- 
nese front in Suiyuan. For them all Chiang had but one 
command: “Destroy the Reds” “I told them,” said Chiang 
in his own diary, “that the bandit-suppression campaign had 
been prosecuted to such a stage that it Y'ould require only 
the last five minutes to achieve the final success.” 

So, despite all the objections and warnings, the General- 
issimo summoned a General Staff Congress on the loth, 
when final plans were formally adopted to push ahead with 
the Sixth Campaign. A general mobilization order was pre- 
pared for the Hsipei, Tungpei, and Nanking troops already 
in Kansu and Shensi, together with the Nanking troops 
A\'aiting at T’ungkuan. It was announced that the order 



442 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

would be published on the 12th. It was openly stated that 
if (Marshal Chang refused these orders his troops u'-ould be 
disarmed by Nanking forces, and'he himself would be dis- 
missed from his command. General Chiang Ting-wen had 
already been appointed to replace Chiang Hsueh-liang as 
head of the Bandit Suppression Commission. At the same 
time reports reached both Chang and Yang that the Blue- 
shirts, together with the police, had prepared a “black list” 
of Communist sympathizers in their armies, who were to be 
arrested immediately after publication of the mobilization 
order. 

Thus it was as the culmination of this complicated and 
historic chain of events that Chang Hsueh-liang called a 
joint meeting of the division commanders of the Tungpei 
and Hsipei armies at ten o’clock on the night of December 
1 1 . Orders had been secretly given on the previous day for 
a division of Tungpei troops, and a regiment of Yang Hu- 
cheng’s army to move into the environs of Sianfu. The de- 
cision was now taken to use these forces to “arrest” the 
Generalissimo and his staff. The mutiny of 170,000 troops 
had become a fact. 



2 

The Generalissimo Is Arrested 
■ 4 Is,. 

W HATEVER we may say against its motives, or the 
political energies behind them, it must be admitted 
diat the coup de theatre enacted at Sian was brilliantly 
timed and brilliantly executed. It was infinitely less bloody 
and clumsy than Chiang Kai-shek’s coup d’etat at Nanking 



THE GENERALISSIMO IS ARRESTED 443 

or Shanghai, or the Communists’ seizure of Canton. No 
word of the rebels’ plans reached their enemies until too 
■ late. By six o’clock on the morning of December 1 1 the 
whole affair was over. Tungpei and Hsipei troops were in 
control at Sian. The Blueshirts, surprised in their sleep, had 
been disarmed and arrested; practically the whole General 
Staff had been surrounded in its quarters at the Sian Guest 
House, and tvas imprisoned; Governor Shao Li-tzu and the 
chief of police were also prisoners; the city police force had 
surrendered to the mutineers, and fifty Nanking bombers 
and their pilots had been seized at the aerodrome. 

But the arrest of the Generalissimo was a bloodier affair. 
Chiang Kai-shek was staying ten miles from the city, at Lin- 
tung, a famous hot-springs resort, which had been cleared of 
all other guests. To Lintung, at midnight, went twenty-six- 
year-old Captain Sun Ming-chiu, commander of the Young 
Marshal’s bodyguard. Half-way there he picked up two 
hundred Tungpei troops, and at 3 a.m. drove to the outskirts 
of Lintung. Tliere they waited till five o’clock, tt'hen the 
first lorry, with about fifteen men, roared up to the hotel, 
was challenged by sentries, and opened fire. 

Reinforcements soon arrived for the Tungpei vanguard, 
and Captain Sun led an assault on the Generalissimo’s resi- 
dence. Taken by complete surprise, the bodyguards put up 
a short fight — long enough, however, to permit the 
astounded Generalissimo to escape. When Captain Sun 
reached his bedroom he had already fled. Sun took a search 
party up the side of the rocky, snow-covered hill behind the 
resort and conducted his manhunt. Presently they found 
the Generalissimo’s personal servant, and not long after- 
wards came upon the man himself. Clad only in a loose robe 
thrown over his nightshirt, his bare feet and hands cut in his 
nimble flight up the mountain, shaking in the bitter cold, and 
minus his false teeth, he was crouching in a cave beside a 
great rock. 



444 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

“Sun Ming-chiu hailed him, and the Generalissimo’s first 
words were, ‘If you are my comrade, shoot me and finish it 
all.’ To which Sun replied, ‘We will not shoot. We only ask 
you to lead our country against Japan.’ 

“Chiang remained seated on his rock, and said with diffi- 
culty, ‘Call Marshal Chang here, and I will come down.’ 

“ ‘Marshal Chang isn’t here. The troops are rising in the 
city; we came to protect you.’ 

“At this the Generalissimo seemed much relieved, and 
called for a horse to take him down the mountain. ‘There is 
no horse here,’ said Sun, ‘but I will carry you down the, 
mountain on my back.’ And he knelt at Chiang’s feet. After 
some hesitation, Chiang accepted, and climbed painfully on 
to the broad back of the young officer. They proceeded 
solemnly down the slope in this fashion, escorted by troops, 
until a servant arrived with Chiang’s shoes. The little group 
got into a car at the foot of the hill, and set off for Sian. 

“ ‘The past is the past,’ Sun said to him. ‘From now on 
there must be a new policy for Chin^. What are you going 
to do? . . . The one urgent task for China is to fight Japan. 
This is the special demand of the men of the North-east. 
A^^hy do you not fight Japan, but instead give the order to 
fight the Red Army?’ 

“ ‘I am the leader of the Chinese people,’ Chiang shouted. 
‘I represent the nation. I think my policy is correct,’ 

In this way, a little bloody but unbowed, the Generalis- 
simo arrived in the city, where he became the involuntary 
guest of General Yang Flu-cheng and the Young Marshal. 

On the day of the coup all division commanders of the 
Tungpei and FIsipei armies signed and issued a circular tele- 
gram addressed to the central Government, to various pro- 
vincial leaders, and to the people at large. The brief missive 

^ Part of an interview with Sun Ming-chiu by James Bertram, who 
was my correspondent in Sianfu for the Daily Herald. 



THE GENERALISSIMO IS ARRESTED 445 

explained that “in order to stimulate his awakening” the 
Generalissimo had been “requested to remain for the time 
being in Sianfu.” Meanwhile, his personal safety was guar- 
anteed. The demands of “national salvation” submitted to 
the Generalissimo were broadcast to the nation — ^but every- 
where suppressed. Here are the famous eight points: 

1. Reorganize the Nanking Government and admit all 
parties to share the joint responsibility of national salvation. 

2. End all civil war immediately and adopt the policy of 
armed resistance against Japan. 

3. Release the (seven) leaders of the patriotic movement 
in Shanghai. 

4. Pardon all political prtsoners. 

5. Guarantee the people liberty of assembly. 

6 . Safeguard the people’s rights of patriotic organization 
and political liberty. 

7. Put into effect the will of Dr. Sun Yat-sen. 

8. Immediately convene a National Salvation conference. 

, To this programme the Chinese Red Army, the Soviet 
Government and the Communist Party of China immedi- 
ately offered their support.^ A few days later Chang Hsueh- 
liang sent to Pao An his personal plane, which returned to 
Sian with three Red delegates: Chou En-lai, vice-chairman 
of the military council; Yeh Chien-ying, chief-of-staff of 
the East Front Army; and Po Ku, chairman of the North- 
west Branch Soviet Government. A joint meeting was called 
between the Tungpei, Hsipei, and Red Army delegates, and 

^ Seven of the above eight points correspond exactly to the pro- 
gramme of “national salvation” advocated in a circular telegram is- 
sued by the Communist Partj' and the Soviet Government on Decem- 
ber I, 1936. 'Chang Hsueh-liang and the Communists had already 
agreed on this programme at least that earl)', though tlie Communists 
did not anticipate that Chang was to adopt such surprising measures 
in bringing it to the consideration of Nanking. 



446 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

the three groups became open allies. On the 14th an an- 
nouncement was issued of the formation of a United Anti- 
Japanese Army, consisting of about 130,000 Tungpei troops, 
40,000 Hsipei troops, and approximately 90,000 troops of 
the' Red Army. 

Chang Hsueh-liang was elected chairman of the United 
Anti-Japanese Military Council, and Yang Hu-cheng vice- 
chairman. Tungpei troops under General Yu Hsueh-chung 
had on the 12th carried out a coup of their own against the 
central Government officials and troops in Lanchow, capital 
of Kansu province, and had disarmed the Nanking garrison 
there. In the rest of Kansu the Reds and the Manchurian 
troops together held control of all main communications, 
surrounding about 50,000 Nanking troops in that province, 
so that the rebels had effective power in all Shensi and 
Kansu. 

Immediately after the incident, Tungpei and Hsipei 
troops moved eastward to the Shensi-Shansi and Shensi- 
Honan borders, on instructions from the new Council. From 
the same Council the Red Army took orders to push south- 
ward. In a week the Reds were in occupation of virtually 
the whole of north Shensi above the Wei River. A Red van- 
guard under P’eng Teh-huai was located at San Yuan, a city 
only thirty miles from Sianfu. Another contingent of 10,000 
Reds under Hsu Hai-tung was preparing to move over to 
the Shensi-Honan border. The Red, North-eastern and 
North-western troops stood shoulder to shoulder, along the 
Shensi border. But while these defensive arrangements pro- 
ceeded, all three armies issued clear-cut statements declaring 
their opposition to a new internal war, reaffirming their 
purely political aims, and denying any intentions of attack. 

Steps were taken at once to carry out the eight points— 
to which the Red Army scrupulously adhered, in its new 
territory refraining from executing the programme of land 
redistribution. All orders for war against the Reds were can- 



THE GENERALISSIiMO IS ARRESTED 447 

celled. Over 400 political prisoners in Sianfu were released. 
Censorship of the press was removed, and all suppression of 
patriotic (anti-Japanese) organizations was lifted. Hundreds 
of students were freed to work among the populace, build- 
ing United Front organizations in every class. They toured 
into the villages also, where they began to train and arm the 
farmers, politically and militarily. In the army the political 
workers conducted an unprecedented anti-Japanese cam- 
paign. Mass meetings were summoned almost daily. At one 
of them over 100,000 people attended. At all, the slogans 
were to unite to resist Japan and to stop civil w^ar — the latter 
a very realistic appeal to farmers whose grain and cattle had 
already been commandeered for the coming anti-Red drive. 

But news of all these happenings was suppressed outside 
the provinces of the North-west. Editors who dared publish 
anything emanating from Sian, as even the highly respect- 
able Ta Kzmg Pao pointed out, were threatened with instant 
arrest. Meantvhile Nanking’s propaganda machine threw out 
a smoke-screen that further confused an already befuddled 
public. Dumbfounded by the news, Nanking’s first reaction 
was to call a meeting of the Standing Committee (of the 
Central E.xecutive Committee and the Central Political 
Council), which promptly pronounced Chang Hsueh-liang 
a rebel, dismissed him from his posts, and demanded the re- 
lease of the Generalissimo, failing which punitive operations 
would begin. People accepted the sensational news with 
varying reactions, some with jubilance at Chiang’s arrest, 
others with consternation. Signs of disintegration appeared 
everyvdiere. Chiang Kai-shek was t’ne pivot round which 
the contradictory forces in China had for a while found 
some degree of stabilization. With his removal from the 
central position all those forces were freed, and thesis and 
antithesis came into open conflict, to seek by necessity new* 
alignments, new centralizing influences, new synthe.ses. 

For three days nobody knew whether Chiang Kai-shek 



448 WHITE WOULD AGAIN 

was dead or alive — except the Associated Press, which flatly 
announced that Chang Hsueh-liang had described over the 
radio how and why he had killed him. Nobody knew ex- 
actly what the rebels planned to do. Few fully realized the 
political significance of their position; even some of their 
sympathizers, misled by false reports, were inclined to con- 
demn them. Nanking cut all communications with the 
North-west, and its papers and manifestoes were burned by 
the censors. Sian broadcast all day long, over and over again, 
not attacks on the Government, but explanations of its ac- 
tions, appeals for reason and peace; but Nanking’s powerful 
radio station turned on a deafening siren which blotted out 
everything they said. Never before in China was the appall- 
ing power of dictatorship over all means of public expres- 
sion so mightily demonstrated. 

Hundreds of words were deleted from my own dis- 
patches, I made several attempts to send out the eight de- 
mands of the North-west — ^Avhich might have helped a little 
to clarify the enigma for Western readers — but the censors 
let out not a word. Many of the foreign correspondents 
were completely ignorant of recent happenings in the 
North-west, and glibly accepted as news ever)'' falsehood 
fabricated by the propaganda shops. For while real news 
and facts were rigorously suppressed, the Kuomintang and 
its adherents released to the world some puerile lies which 
made China appear much more of a madhouse than it really 
was. There were such yarns as these: the rebels had nailed 
the chief of police to the city gates; the Reds had occupied 
Sian, were looting the city, and flying Red banners on the 
walls; Chang Hsueh-liang had been assassinated by his own 
men. Almost daily it v'as stated by Nanking that riots were 
taking place in Sian, The Reds were abducting young boys 
and girls. Women were being “communized.” The entire 
Tungpei and Hsipei armies had turned bandit. There was 



THE GENEKALISSIMO IS ARRESTED 449 

looting everywhere. Chang Hsueh-liang was demanding 
$80,000,000 ransom for the Generalissimo.’^ Japan was be- 
hind Chang Hsueh-liang. Moscow was behind him. He was 
a Red. He was a drug addict. He was an “ungrateful scoun- 
drel for whom death was too good.” He was a bandit. 

Many of the wildest rumours circulated had their origin 
also with the Japanese press in China, and even with high 
Japanese officials. The Japanese were especially fertile with 
alarming “eye-witness” reports of the “Red menace” in Sian 
— although they, like everybody else, had no contact what- 
ever with that city. The Japanese also discovered Soviet 
Russian intrigue behind the coup. But they met their masters 
in propaganda in Moscow’s press, Izvestia and Pravda went 
so far in their official disclaimers of responsibility, denuncia- 
tions of Chang Hsueh-liang, and hosannas to Chiang Kai- 
shek, that they invented a story showing that the Sian affair 
was jointly inspired by the former Chinese premier, Wang 
Ching-wei, and “the Japanese imperialists” — a libel so antip- 
odal to the facts that even the most reactionary press in 
China had not dared to suggest it, out of fear of ridicule, 
“Prevarication is permissible, gentlemen,” it was Lenin who 
once e.xclaimed, “but within limits!” 

The barrage of slander continued for days. But after the 
first week of Chiang’s captivity Nanking’s efforts to cork up 
the news behind the exciting events began to prove inade- 
quate, Leaks occurred, and then big gaps. The eight-point 
programme was widely published in the surreptitious press, 
and won adherents among liberals and progressives, for it 
was really a liberal-progressive bourgeois programme. And 
the public began to realize that the North-west did not mean 
to make civil war, but to stop it. Sentiment slowly began to 

^ Mme. Chiang Kai-shek, deploring such rumours, wrote that “no 
question of money or increased power or position was at any time 
brought up.” 



450 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

change ffom feai* for the safety of an individual militarist 
into fear for the safety of the State. 'Civil war now could not 
save Chiang, but it might ruin China. 

Intrigue for capture of power had begun in Nanking 
with the news of Chiang’s capture. Ambitious War Minister 
Ho Ying-chin, closely affiliated with the pro-Japanese “po- 
litical-science clique” of the Kuomintang, then in high office 
at Nanking— and against whom the eight-point programme 
was primarily directed — was hot for a “punitive expedition.” 
In this General Ho was fully supported (“instigated” is more 
probably the word, as General Ho is a man boim to be “insti- 
gated”) by the pro-Fascist Whampoa clique, the Blueshirts, 
the Wang Ching-rvei (out-of-office) faction, the Western 
Hills group, the “C. C.” faction, and Nanking’s German and 
Italian advisers. They all saw in the situation an opportunity 
to seize complete military power, relegating the liberal, 
pro-American, pro-British, pro-Russian, and United Front 
groups in the Kuomintang to political nonentity. General 
Ho promptly mobilized twenty Nanking divisions and 
moved them towards the Honan-Shensi border. He sent 
squadrons of aeroplanes roaring over Sianfu, and made ten- 
tative thrusts at the rebels’ lines with his infantry. Some of 
the Nanking planes (anti-Japanese “birthday gifts” to the 
Generalissimo) experimentally bombed Weinan and Huah- 
sien, inside the Shensi border, and killed a number of factory 
operatives. When he learned of the bombing, Chiang Kai- 
shek writes in his diary, he was “very glad.” 

But evidently not so Alme. Chiang, who then understood 
the situation better than her husband. Angered and alarmed 
at these preparations for a “feast over the corpse” (few peo- 
ple in Nanking then thought the Generalissimo would come 
out of Sian alive), she called on General Ho and demanded 
an explanation. If he began a war, could he stop it? Could he 
save her husband, tvhose safet}^ she wrote, “was inseparable 
from the continued e.xistence of the nation itself”? Did he 



THE GENERALISSIMO IS ARRESTED 45 1 

want to kill her husband? The General blanched. She in- 
sisted that he halt the hostilities and bend his genius to secure 
the release of M. Chiang. She wanted him back still breath- 
ing. And she won her point — until Chiang’s own envoy 
reached Nanking. 

It became evident also that if war started on a big scale 
the North-west would be not without allies. Military and 
political leaders in Kwangsi, Kwantung, Yunnan, Hunan, 
Szechuan, Shantung, Hopei, Chahar, Shansf, Suiyuan, and 
Ninghsia were all marginal cases, and it was almost certain 
none of them would lift a linger to help a war begun by Ho 
Ying-chin. Any one or even all of them might turn to with 
the rebels. Controlling political cliques in all those provinces 
would at best demand a big price for neutrality, and every- 
one would manoeuvre to increase its power during the con- 
jflict. This became obvious on the 23 rd, when a circular tele- 
gram was issued by powerful Generals Sung Cheh-yuan and 
Han Fu-chu (rulers of Hopei and Shantung), which urged 
a peaceful settlement, definitely warned against the opening 
of hostilities, and clearly intimated a lack of sympathy with 
General Ho’s plans. 

The big question nov' became this; whether Chiang Kai- 
shek could, even from his seat of captivity in Sian, still mus- 
ter enough support in Nanking to prevent the outbreak of 
an exhausting war which was certain in any case to mean hi.<i 
own political, if not physical, demise. In Nanking and Shang- 
hai his brothers-in-law, T. V. Soong, chairman of the Cen- 
tral Bank of China, H. H. Kung, acting premier, and Mme. 
Chiang rallied Chiang’s personal followers and worked fran- 
tically to prevent the more reactionar)’- elements in Nanking 
from initiating an offensive in the name of an “anti-Commu- 
nist punitive expedition.” 

Meanwhile, swift changes of heart were taking place in 
Sian. Soon after his capture the Generalissimo had begun to 
realize that perhaps his worst “betrayers” v^ere not in Sian 



452 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

but in Nanking. Contemplating this situation, Chiang Kai- 
shek must have decided that he did not choose to be the 
martyr over whose dead body General Ho Ying-chin or 
anybody else would climb to dictatorial power. Descending 
from his Olympian perch, he promptly began in a very 
astute and realistic manner to deal with the common mortals 
who held his life in their hands. Even the Red-bandits. 


3 

Chiang, Chang and the Reds 



T he story of the Generalissimo’s ordeal in Sian has been 
written by no less an authority than the Generalissimo 
himself, with the able collaboration of his charming wife, 
Chiang Soong Mei-ling.^ Those who have not read their ab- 
sorbing narrative of this turning-point episode in Chinese 
history are warmly urged to do so, I know of no more ex- 
citing and dramatic a document of recent times, and none 
which, for the reader equipped with some knowledge of 
China, tlirows into such sharp and vivid focus the character 
and mentality of its rulers. 

The facts presented here, therefore, are offered in all 
humility merely as a meagre supplement to the efforts of the 
Premier-Generalissimo and his brave and talented wife. 
They saw the events at Sian as an outrage inflicted upon 
their own highly emotional assertions of personal destiny, 

^ Sian, A Coup D'^Etat, by Generalissimo and Mme. Chiang Kai- 
shelf (Shanghai, 1937). 



/GHIA>rG, CHANG AND THE REDS 453 

and have given us the subjective account of their experi- 
ences, But the heavy 'impingement of those events on their 
own lives naturally imposed great restraints, and privateh' 
they would probably be the first to admit that reasons of 
politics, and the necessity of maintaining the dignit)’’ of of- 
fice, obliged them to omit much material of value. 

Here it must be emphasized that for most Chinese, a race 
of pragmatists, ethics were not primarily involved in judg- 
ing the events at Sian. Chinese history is full of similar oc- 
currences, especially in the ancient classics of feudal com- 
bat, which every Chinese general learns almost by heart. 
And there are plenty of recent precedents. In 1924 the 
“Christian General,” Feng Yii-hsiang, arrested and held pris- 
oner the then President of China, Tsao K’un, and forced him 
to accept his political demands. Public esteem for Feng very 
rapidly increased. He later became vice-chairman of Chiang 
Kai-shek’s Military Affairs Commission. Other recent ex- 
amples have been provided by Chiang Kai-shek himself. Not 
so long ago he “detained” the late Hu Han-min, his “elder 
brother,” senior and rival in the Kuomintang. Another in- 
stance was the kidnapping of General Li Cliai-sum. Chiang 
kept him prisoner in Nanking until he had broken his po- 
litical power. 

Then it should be remembered that China is not yet a 
democratic country, and very often in politics it reverts to 
pure feudalism. With the press completely stifled, and the 
populace disfranchised, everj-body knew quite %veli that 
there was but one effective way to censure Nanking, or alter 
its policies. That was b)'’ armed demonstration, or what the 
Chinese call pwg chien — “military persuasion” — a recog- 
nized tactic in Chinese political manceuvre. Sentimentality 
discarded for a moment, it may be held that Chang Hsueh- 
liang chose the most humane and direct method conceivable 
by 'which to achieve his purpose, when he used direct action 
upon the head of the dictatorship. It cost a minimum loss of 



454 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

life, and a minimum of bloodshed. It was a feudal method, 
yes, but the Marshal was dealing with a personality whose 
pivotal role in semi-feudal politics he intuitively understood. 
His action was framed in terms of utmost realism, and toda,y 
it is generally recognized that its objective historical effects 
were progressive. 

But was Chiang Kai-shek’s life ever really in serious 
danger? 

It appears that it was. Not from the Young Alarshal, and 
not from the Reds. From Yang Hu-cheng, possibly. But 
most certainly from the radical younger officers of the 
North-eastern and North-western armies, from the discon- 
tented and mutinous soldiery, and from the organized and 
arming masses, all of whom demanded a voice in the dis- 
posal of the Premier. Resolutions passed by the young offi- 
cers called for a mass trial of “Traitor” Chiang and all his 
staff. The mood of the army decidedly favoured the Gen- 
eralissimo’s immolation. Curiously enough, it fell to the lot 
of the Communists to persuade them that his life should be 
saved! 

Communist policy throughout the Sian incident has 
never been clearly explained. Many people assumed that the 
Communists, in triumphant revenge for the decade of re- 
lentless war which Chiang Kai-shek had u^aged against them, 
would now demand his death. Many believed that they 
would use this opportunity to coalesce with the Tungpei 
and Hsipei armies, greatly enlarge their base, and challenge 
Nanking in a great new struggle for power. Actually they 
did nothing of the sort. They not only urged a peaceful set- 
tlement, and the release of Chiang Kai-shek, but also his re- 
turn to leadership in Nanking. Even Mme. Chiang says that, 
“quite contrary to outside beliefs, they [the Reds] were not 
interested in detaining the Generalissimo.” But why not? 

Allusions have frequently been made to the demands of 



CHIAXG, CHAXG AXD THE REDS 455 

the Communists for cessation of civil war, a “national United 
Front” to oppose Japan, and the realization of a democratic 
political structure at Nanking. These slogans were abso- 
lutely honest, simply because they coincided M'ith the dy- 
namics of a strategy forced upon the Communists by all ob- 
jective conditions. Economically, politically, militarily, in 
every wsY, they really needed peace, really wanted a repre- 
sentativ^e, many-sided democracy, to achieve their immedi- 
ate goals. The)'- saw clearly that such a democracy was the 
only satisfactory formation under ttTich it was nou^ prac- 
ticable to unite the whole nation in an anti-imperialist strug- 
gle for independence against Japan. And this struggle, they 
had fully convinced themselves, must precede, was insepa- 
rable from, indeed must simultaneously initiate, further ef- 
forts to achieve social revolution in China, They had learned 
empirically that continued revolutionary war, in the face of 
a foreign menace which promised e.vtinction for the entire 
nation,'Would further weaken not only the national strength 
of resistance, but with it perhaps bury the potential forces 
of the revolution itself. 

“The victory of the Chinese national liberation move- 
ment,” said Mao Tse-tung, “will be part of the vuctory of 
world Socialism, because to defeat imperialism in China 
means the destruction of one of its most powerful bases. If 
China udns its independence, the tvorld rctmlution will prog- 
ress ver)'^ rapidly. If our countr)’^ is subjugated by the enemy, 
we sliall lose everything. For a people being deprived of its 
national freedom, the revolutionary task is not immediate 
Socialism, but the struggle for independence. We cannot 
even discuss Conmmnism if we are robbed of a country in 
which to practise it'’''- 

Thus it was fundamentally on the conclusions of this 
thesis that the Communists based their peace propo.sals to 
an inccn-icw with me at Pao An. Italics mine. 



456 WHITE AVORLD AGAIN 

the Kuomintang, even before the capture of the Generalis- 
simo. Throughout that crisis they adhered to their “line” 
with amazing steadiness, and a dispassionate objectivity un- 
equalled in the highly personalized politics of China. Despite 
all the temptations which the situation obviously presented 
to them, they gave a demonstration of Party discipline which 
must profoundly impress any candid observer. They recog- 
nized that the central meaning of Sian was for them the op- 
portunity to demonstrate the sincerity for their programme 
for a United Front. They had nothing to do with the arrest 
of Chiang Kai-shek. It astonished them as much as the rest 
of the country. But they had much to do with its denoue- 
ment. 

Immediately after hearing of the event, the Soviet Gov- 
ernment and the Communist Party called a joint meeting, at 
which it was decided to support the eight-point programme, 
and to participate in the United Anti-Japanese Council. 
Soon afterwards they issued a circular telegram^ expressing 
the belief that “the Sian leaders acted with patriotic sincerity 
and zeal, wishing speedily to formulate a national policy of 
immediate resistance to Japan.” The telegram strongly con- 
demned Ho Ying-chin’s punitive expedition, declaring that 
“if civil war is launched, the whole nation will be plunged 
into complete chaos, the Japanese robbers, taking advantage 
of this, will invade our nation, and enslavement will be our 
fate.” To secure a peaceful settlement, the Reds urged that 
negotiations be opened on the basis of no war, and the sum- 
moning of a peace conference of all parties, at which would 
be discussed the programme of united national resistance to 
Japan. This telegram clearly indicated the policy followed 
out by the Red delegates whom Marshal Chang summoned 
to Sian. 

Shortly after his arrival, the head of the Communist dele- 

^ “Proposal for tlie Convention of a Peace Conference,” Pao An, 
December 19, 1936. 



CHIANG, CHANG AND THE REDS 457 

gation, Chou En-lai, went to see Chiang Kai-shek.^ One can 
easily imagine the effect of this meeting on the Generalis- 
simo. Still physically weak and psychologically deeply 
shaken by his experiences, Chiang is said to have turned pale 
with apprehension when Chou En-lai — his former political 
attache, for whose head he had once offered §80,000 — en- 
tered the room and gave him a friendly greeting. He must 
have at once concluded that the Red Army had entered 
Sian, and that he was to be turned over to it as captive! Such 
a fear also troubled the comely head of Aime. Chiang Kai- 
shek, who says that she “felt the objective (if Chiang were 
removed from Sian) would be somewhere behind Red 
lines.” 

But the Generalissimo w'as quickl)^ relieved of this appre- 
hension by both Chou and the iMarshal, both of whom ac- 
knowledged him as Commander-in-Chicf, and sat down to 
explain the attitude of the Communists towards the national 
crisis. At first frigidly silent, Chiang gradually thawed as he 
listened, for the first time during his decade of war against 
it, to the Communist point of view. Between December 17th 
and 25th Chiang Kai-shek, Chang Hsueh-liang, Yang Hu- 
cheng, and the Reds held frequent conversations. Chiang at 
first refused even to discuss the rebels’ programme. But as he 
remained isolated from the environment provided for so 
long by his own satellites, as news came of the intrigues go- 
ing on in Nanking, as his fears increased of the consequences 
of a big civil war, he became more convinced not only of 
the siuoerity of his immediate captors, but also of the Reds, 
in their opposition to civil war and their readiness to assist 
in the peaceful unification of the countr)% under his own 
leadership, p»'ovided he defined a policy of positive armed 
resistance to japan. 

Chiang naturally does not record the details of these dis- 

^ In his nv.-n accou.^l Chiany docs not even mention having talked 
TO Chou En-!.'i. 



458 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

cussions in his diary, for his position was, and had to be, that 
he never “bargained” for the peace that Avas achieved. There 
could be only “submission to the Government,” The full 
content of these two weeks must remain obscure until Chang 
Hsueh-liang and others record their versions of the inter- 
views — ^which, in view of present political formations, may 
not be for some time. From available facts, however, it is 
possible to reconstruct the outline of events after the 12th. 

The first progress made towards an agreement was the 
arrival in Sian on December 14th of an Australian, Mr. 
W. H. Donald, the Generalissimo’s “foreign friend,” a kind 
of unofficial adviser to Chiang, who had formerly served 
Chang Hsueh-liang in a similar capacity. Why did the 
Young Marshal imdte Donald, of all people, to come to see 
with his own eyes and give the world “assurances- of his 
[Chiang’s] safety and comfort”.^ The reason casts an inter- 
esting sidelight on Chinese psychology, Chang knew, and so 
did Nanking, that nobody would believe the word of any 
Chinese who went on such a mission, in such a crisis. But a 
foreigner, being an “outside party,” would be trusted! 

Donald returned to Loyang on the 1 5th, and telephoned 
his report to Nanking. Chiang was alive and well treated. 
He also brought word that the Generalissimo was sending 
General Chiang Ting-wen (one of his captured staff mem- 
bers) with an autographed letter to the War Ministry and 
the Government at Nanking. This news strengthened Adme. 
Chiang’s hand very much against the warmongers, as she 
now had definite proof not only that her husband still lived, 
but that there was “another way” (besides war), as Donald 
had put it. A peaceful settlement was possible. 

On the 1 8th, General Chiang Ting- wen reached Nan- 
Idng with the Generalissimo’s letter, ordering a halt in War 
Minister Ho’s “punitive expedition.” General Chiang Ting- 
wen also had the delicate mission of returning to Sian with , 



CHIAXG, CHANG AND THE REDS 459 

some delegates from Nanking, As first choice in “delegates,” 
Chang Hsuch-liang had natura]J>' enough suggested Dr. 
H. H. Kung, die hcavy-jowled brother-in-law' of the Gen- 
eralissimo, who was then not only Finance Minister but, in 
Chiang’s absence, also acting premier and head of the State. 
Dr. Kung demurred, for “doctors advised against Dr. Kung’s 
flying to Sian,” Mmc. Chiang relates. But the rest of Nan- 
king also advised against it, for his trip would surely have 
been generally interpreted as the opening of official negotia- 
tions, and this, General Ho Ying-chin insisted, must be 
avoided, for the sake of the Government’s prestige. As com- 
promise, therefore, Chiang Kai-shek’s other brother-in-lay', 
Harvard-educated T. V. Soong, head of the National Eco- 
nomic Council, went in Dr. Kung's place. “T. V.," who be- 
longed to the liberal elements in Nanking, the so-called 
“European-Amcrican” group in the Kuomintang (which 
was e.\tremely anti- Japanese, and just now favoured the 
United Front movement), was persona grata in Sian, and 
the best possible mediator. ^Vith “T. V.” flew General Ku 
Tsu-tung, the only important Nanking general, besides War 
Minister Ho, who had not been captured in the coup d'etat. 

T. V. Soong arrived in Sian by plane on the 20th. By this 
time a general agreement “in principle” seems to have already 
been reached. The Generalissimo makes no reference to it, 
but the follov'ing excerpts from the statement issued to the 
foreign press by A'larshal Chang Hsueh-liang on the 19th in- 
dicates that he, at least, regarded the settlement as virtually 
complete: 

“The Generalissimo’s prolonged stay here is not of our 
doing. As soon as Mr. Donald arrived last Monday, and the 
Generalissimo had somewhat recovered from his natural in- 
dignation, and his reluctance to talk, he calmly enough dis- 
cussed the problems confronting us all, and by Tuesday had 



460 AVHITE WORLD AGAIN 

agreed in principle with the points we had in view for adop- 
tion of a defined national policy and the effecting of changes 
to permit the nation to develop logically and freely, both 
politically and materially, and in accordance with the will 
of the late Dr. Sun Yat-sen. 

“I therefore telegraphed, welcoming anyone to come 
from Nanking to hear the Generalissimo’s views, and ar- 
range Avith him for the necessary safeguards to prevent the 
development of civil Avarfare. The Generalissimo naturally 
vigorously demanded that he be released to proceed to Nan- 
king, but while I personally had full confidence that the 
Generalissimo would carry out his promises, it was impos- 
sible to risk his being persuaded after his arrival at Nanking 
to -continue Avith the warfare. . . . He acquiesced in .the 
vieAV, hoAvever, and ever since then he has been waiting in 
vain, as have we, for someone to arrive from Nanking com- 
petent to deal Avith the matter (/.e. to offer adequate guar- 
antees), so that the Generalissimo can return to the capital. 

“That is all. It is a strange thing that there has been this 
delay. Had someone come, he could hat^e returned some 
days ago. . . . 

“Chang Hsueh-liang.”^ 

But serious trouble AA'^as developing in the ranks of the 
radical younger officers of the Tungpei Army. They had 
acquired strong direct Amice in the affairs of Chang’s mili- 
tary council, and their AueAA^s AAmre noAV important. Infected 
by the temper of the strong mass moAmment noAv spreading 
throughout the North-Atmst, they Avere at first fiercely op- 
posed to the release of Chiang Kai-shek, until Nanking be- 
gan to carry out the eight-point programme. The majority, 

^ This telegram was sent from Sianfu on December 19, addressed 
to Frazer, Lovdon Times correspondent in Shanghai, with the request 
that it be given to other correspondents. Nanking censors suppressed 
it. A cop7 was also given to Air. W. H. Donald, who is the source 
of this quotation. 



CHIANG, CHANG AND THE REDS 46 1 

'in fact, insisted upon giving Chiang a “popular trial” for his 
life, before an enormous mass meeting which they planned 
to call. 

The possibility of this public humiliation had also oc- 
curred to Chiang. No one knew any better than he the po- 
tentialities of the movement that had been set afoot in the 
North-v^est, for a similar rising had almost overwhelmed 
him in 1927. Chiang’s whole career had been a struggle 
against the intervention in his well-ordered chain of events 
of that disturbing imperative which he calls “the mob.” Talk 
of the “popular trial” was even on the lips of the sentries 
around him; Chiang tells of listening through the doorway 
to the conversation of his jailers, in which his fate was dis- 
cussed. “When I heard [the words] ‘the people’s verdict,’ 
I realized that it was a malicious plot to kill me by using the 
mob as their excuse.” 

But here the Red delegation was most effective. Follow- 
ing their own talks with Chiang, they had received enough 

'assurances from him (aside from assurances now clearly to 
be inferred from the whole situation) to believe that if re- 
leased he would be obliged to stop civil war, and in general 
to carry out the whole “United Front” programme. But to 
do so Chiang’s position must be preserved, he must return to 
Nanking with his prestige still intact. They therefore saw 
clearly that if he signed any agreement, and this became 
known, or if he were submitted to the indignity of a “peo- 
ple’s trial,” these facts would irreparably injure him, and de- 
stroy his position of leadership. Worse still, if Chiang were 
killed, civil war inevitably would develop on an immense 
scale, the decade of stalemate in the Red-Kuomintang war 
would be very much prolonged, and the hopes of achieving 
an anti-Japanese national front would become remote in- 
deed. From such a prospect no party could hope to benefit, 
only China could suffer, and only Japan gain. So, at least, 
the'Reds argued. 



462 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

Tiius Po Ku, Yeh Chien-ying, Chou En-lai, and other 
Communists in Sian now spent many hours, often talking 
through an entire night, explaining and explaining the rea- 
sons for their policy. Their position was extremely confus- 
ing to the young Tungpei radicals, for they had expected 
the Reds to be the first to cry for Chiang’s blood. Some of 
them actually wept in anger at the “betrayal” — for this 
group looked for political leadership to the Communists, 
who had as much influence with them as Chang Hsueh-liang 
himself. But though most of them — and Yang Hu-cheng 
with them — ^remained unconvinced of the wisdom. of releas- 
ing Chiang, the demand for his death somewhat diminished. 
Gradually a more reasonable attitude prevailed. With less 
pressure upon him now for drastic action, Chang Elsueh- 
liang made more progress with his conversations. 

Besides T. V. Soong, Donald, and two or three other ar- 
rivals from Nanking, there was already a big part of the 
Government in Sian, including the Governors of Shensi and 
Kansu, the Minister of Interior, the Vice-Minister of War, 
the President of the Military Advisory Council, the Chief 
Aide-de-Camp of the Generalissimo, and assorted members 
of the General Staff, who had been “detained” with Chiang 
Kai-shek. Most of them took some part in the parleys vidth 
Chang Hsueh-liang, Yang Hu-cheng, Chou En-lai, and high 
commanders of the Tungpei Army. When it came to actual 
negotiations, apparently none of the eight demands was ac- 
cepted pei' se, for both sides recognized the necessity of up- 
holding the prestige of the Government mechanism. But 
Chinese demands always begin tvith the 72 e phis ultra, not 
with any real notion that it is actually attainable, but because 
it erects a high point from which one can coast down to the 
sordid process of bargaining. Sian was no exception. 

The substantial meaning of the eight demands to those 
who supported them was, in correct order of importance, as 



CHIANG, CHANG AND THE REDS 463 

follows: ( I ) cessation of civil war and co-operation between 
the Kuomintang and the Communists; (2)3 defined policy of 
armed resistance against, any further Japanese aggression; 
(3) dismissal of certain “pro-Japanese” officials in Nanking, 
and the adoption of an active diplomacy for creating closer 
relations (alliances, if possible) with Great Britain, America, > 
and Soviet Russia; (4) reorganization of the Tungpei and 
Hsipei armies on an equal footing (politically and militarily) 
with Nanking’s forces; (5) greater political freedom for the 
people; and (6) the creation of some sort of democratic po- 
litical structure at Nanking. 

Those seem to have been the main points of agreement 
betu^een Chiang Kai-shek and Chang Hsueh-liang before 
thej?^ left Sian, Chiang also made a personal guarantee that 
there would be no more civil war. It is certain that Chiang 
Kai-shek is quite honest in saying that he signed no docu- 
ment, and there is no evidence to support any claims that he 
did. But although Nanking and the Generalissimo still had 
their “face,” subsequent events were to show that the Young 
Marshal had not lost his entirely in vain. 

The arrival of Mme, Chiang on the 22 nd no doubt has- 
tened the termination of the interviews, and (as in the lively 
account of her three days in Sian she makes abundantly 
clear) her own importunit)^ and scolding of Chang Hsueh- 
liang speeded up the Generalissimo’s release. Just as her hus- 
band compared himself with Jesus Christ on the Cross, so 
also Mme. Chiang recognized her own role as a Biblical one, 
quoting, “Jehovah will now do a new thing, and that is, he 
will make a woman protect a man.” On the 25th, when Mme. 
Chiang was wistfully wondering if “Santa Claus would pass 
by Sian,” old Nick himself at last appeared in the person of 
Chang Hsueh-liang, who announced that he had won all the 
arguments with his officers. He would that day fly them 
back to Nanking. And he did. 



464 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

Finally, there was that last and flabbergasting gesture of 
face-saving. Alarshal Chang Hsueh-liang, flying in his Own 
plane, went with the Generalissimo to the capital to await 
punishment! 



4 

“Pomt Counter Point’^ 


4Ii= — 

A nd now there began the last act, and the most won- 
_ derful and puzzling of all to novitiates (and even to 
some veteran observers) in the art of Oriental make-believe 
and dissimulation. During the next three months most "of flie 
political involutions created at Sian were completely unrav- 
elled, and in the end the scene was radically altered. Great 
conquests were made and victories won. Great losses and 
retreats were recorded .too. But the duels fought were like 
those you see in a Chinese theatre between two warriors of 
old. They fling out blood-curdling yells, viciously slashing 
the air, but never actually touching each other, and in the 
end, after the loser has acknowledged his demise by lan- 
guidly draping himself on the floor for a moment, he pulls 
himself together and stalks from the stage under his own 
locomotion, with the gravest dignity. 

Such was the fantastic and yet conipletely fascinating 
shadow-boxing that went on at Nanking. Everybody “won,” 
and only histor)^ was cheated — of a victim. 

“Blushing with shame, I have followed you to the capital 
for the appropriate punishment I deserve, so as to vindicate 



“POIXT COUNTER POINT” 465 

discipline,” says Chang Hsueh-liang to the Generalissimo, 
immediately after reaching Nanking. 

“Due to my lack of virtue and defects in my training of 
subordinates,” gallantly responds Chiang, “an unprece- 
dented revmlt broke out. . . . Now that you have expressed 
repentance, I will request the Central authorities to adopt 
suitable measures for rehabilitation of the siruation.” 

And what are the rehabilitation measures? Watch care- 
fully now to see how superbly all acts of severity are com- 
muted by acts of conciliation, note the fine adjustment of 
punishment and compensation. Here is the work of a master 
in the strategy of compromise, of perfect knowledge of how 
to split the difference between what the Chinese call yii shih 
•wu i 77 mg, the “reality without the name,” and yii mmg ‘wii 
shih, the “name without the reality.” 

What is Chiang’s first move on returning to Nanking? 
He issues a long statement confessing his inability to prevent 
the revolt, and his failure as Premier. He immediately orders 
the withdrawal of all Government troops from Shensi — 
thus fulfilling his promise to prevent civil war — and offers 
his resignation. He will repeat it the traditional three times. 
But in reality he takes his resignation no more seriously than 
does Nanking. For on December 29 he calls an emergency 
meeting of the standing committee of the Central Executive 
Committee, and “requests” this highest organ of the Kuo- 
mintang to do four important things. These are: to hand 
over to the Military Affairs Commission (of which he is 
chairman) the punishment of Chang Hsueh-liang; to dele- 
gate to the Military Affairs Commission the settlement of 
the North-west problem; to terminate military operations 
against the rebels; and to abolish (Ho Ying-chin’s) “punitive 
expedition” headquarters. His recommendations are obeyed. 

On December 31 Chang Hsueh-liang is sentenced by 
tribunal (at which Chiang is not present) to ten j-ears’ im- 



466 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

prisonment, and deprivation of civil rights for five years. 
On the following day he is pardoned. And all the time he is 
the personal guest of Chiang Kai-shek’s brother-in-law and 
recent envoy to Sian, T. V. Soong! Then, on January 6, the 
Generalissimo’s Sian headquarters for Bandit Suppression 
(Anti-Communist Campaign) are abolished. Two days later 
it is already known that the skids are under Japanese-speak- 
ing, Japanese-educated Foreign Minister Chang Chun, im- 
portant leader of the “political-science clique” in the Kuo- 
mintang. Chang Chun was the principal target of the North- 
west in its charges of “pro-Japanese” officials at Nanking. 
He is replaced by Dr. Wang Chung-hui, British-educated 
barrister, and a leader of the Ou-Mei P’ai, the anti-Japanese 
“European-American” clique of Kuomintang politicians, 
whom the North-west regards with favour. 

Again at Chiang’s request, a plenary session of the Kuo- 
mintang Central Executive Committee is summoned for 
February 15. In the past its functions have been easily pre- 
dictable, and confined to legalizing important changes in 
Party policy decided in advance by the ruling cliques, which 
in coalition are the Chiang Kai-shek dictatorship. What is 
the important change of policy that is to be introduced now? 
Hundreds of resolutions are prepared for presentation to 
this august body. The great majority deal with “national 
salvation.” 

During January and early February, Chiang Kai-shek 
gets “sick leave.” He retires, with Chang Hsueh-liang, to 
rest in the Generalissimo’s country home near Fenghua, his 
native place in Chekiang. His first resignation rejected, 
Chiang repeats it. Meanwhile, ostensibly freed from official 
duties, he has complete command of the settlement of the 
North-west issue, complete control of the conversations 
now going on with the Tungpei, Hsipei, and Red Army 
commanders. Chang Hsueh-liang, “in disgrace,” is at his 
side, still a virtual prisoner. And in Nanking, Chiang’s lieu- 



“point counter point” 467 

tenants ate busily gathering the information he needs in or- 
der to estimate the new balance of forces created by the 
incident for and against him, in order to re-evaluate his fol- 
lowing, in order to ferret out the loyalists from the oppor- 
tunists who were ready to bomb him in Sian. The Sian inci- 
dent has indeed been, as Mme. Chiang called it, “a blessing 
in disguise.” In more ways than one. 

0 n February 10 the Central Executive Committee of the 
Communist Party addresses to the National Government at 
Nanking, and to the Third Plenary Session, an historic tele- 
gram.’^ It congratulates the Government on the peaceful set- 
tlement of the Sian affair, and on the “impending peaceful 
unification” of the country. To the Plenary Session it pro- 
poses four important changes in policies: to end civil war; 
to guarantee freedom of speech, press, and assembly, and to 
release political prisoners; to invoke a national plan of resist- 
ance to Japanese aggression; and to return to the “three 
principles” of Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s will. 

If these proposals are adopted, in form or in substance, 
the Communists state, they ai'e prepared, for the purpose of 
“hastening national unification and resistance to Japan,” to 
suspend all attempts to overthrow the Government and to 
adopt the follo^ving policies: (i) change the name of the 
Red Army to the “National Revolutionary Army,” and 
place it under the command of the Military Affairs Commis- 
sion; (2) change the name of the Soviet Government to the 
“Special Area Government of the Republic of China”; (3) 
realize a completely democratic form of government within 
the Soviet districts; and (4) suspend the policy of land con- 
fiscation and concentrate the efforts of the people on the 
tasks of national salvation — that is, anti-Nipponism. 

But the Plenary Session, when it convenes on February 
1 5, takes no formal notice of the bandits’ telegram. There is 
much more important business to be accomplished. Chiang 
^Cf. New China (a Soviet publication) (Yenan, March 15, 1937). 



468 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

Kai-shek in his first speech to the Session, once more re- 
counts, in complete and (for him) impassioned utterance, 
the whole story of his captivity in Sian. Dramatically he de- 
scribes how he refused to sign any pledge to carry out the 
rebels’ demands. He tells also how the rebels were converted 
to his own point of view, and were moved to tears by the 
revelations of patriotism in his confiscated diary. And not' 
until he has said all this does he at last, in a very off-hand and 
contemptuous manner, submit the rebels’ eight demands to 
the Session. Reiterating its complete confidence in the Gen- 
eralissimo, the Session rejects his third resignation, condemns 
Chang Hsueh-liang, and just as casually and contemptuously 
rejects the impertinent demands. 

But look! Meanu'hile, in its well-trained way, the Cen- 
tral Executive Committee is accomplishing things on its own 
initiative. Significant above everything else, perhaps, is the 
opening statement of Wang Ching-wei, second only to 
Chiang Kai-shek in party leadership. For the first time since 
the beginning of the anti-Red wars, Comrade Wang makes 
a speech in which he does not say that “internal pacification” 
(eradication of Communism) is the most important prob- 
lem before the country, in which he does not repeat his 
famous phrase, “resistance ajter unification.” The “foremost 
question” before the country now, he says, is “recovery of 
the lost territories.” Moreover, the Session actually adopts 
resolutions to begin by recovering east Hopei and northern 
Chahar, and abolishing the “autonomous” Hopei-Chahar 
Council. Of course, this does not mean that Nanldng is to 
launch a war against Japan. Its significance is simply that 
from now on any further Japanese military aggression on 
Chinese territory will meet with armed resistance’ from 
Nanking. But that is a real leap forward. 

Secondly, the C.E.C., again on the Premier’s recommen- 
dation, decides to convene the long-delayed “People’s Con- 
gress,’ which is supposed to inaugurate' democracy in China, 



“point counter point” 469 

on November 12. No more postponements; this time it is 
final. More important, the standing committee is authorized 
to revise the organic laws of the Congress to increase repre- 
sentation of “all groups.” The Generalissimo — through 
Wang Ching-wei again — announces that the second great 
problem before the nation is the speedy realization of de- 
mocracy. 

Finally, on the last day of the Session, Chiang Kai-shek 
rhalces a statement in At'hich he promises greater liberty of 
speech to all but traitors — and he says nothing about the 
“intellectual bandits” — and this is the first time anyone ever 
heard the Generalissimo defending freedom of the press. He 
also promises “release of political prisoners who repent.” 
Very quietly an order goes out to the press that no longer 
are the epithets “Red-bandit” and “Communist-bandit” to 
be used. A few prisons begin to pour out a trickle of their 
less important victims. 

Then, as if in afterthought, on February 21, last day of 
the historic Session, a long manifesto is issued, ostensibly to 
denounce the Communists. Tlie history of ten years of 
crime and vandalism is recapitulated. That is, the Kuomin- 
tang’s version of the decade. How is it possible, it is asked, 
for human beings who were once decent citizens, even the 
allies of the all-virtuous Kuomintang, to have descended so 
low.^ Is it not obvious that any talk of “reconciliation” with 
brigands, thieves, and murderers is out of the question.^ But 
all this explosion of wind, it turns out, is actual preparation 
for the terms of peace which, to the e.\Treme distaste of 
Tories tvho still oppose peace at any price, conclude the 
manifesto. 

What are these proposals.? The Session offers the Com- 
munists a chance “to make a new start in life," on four con- 
ditions: ( I ) abolition of the R.ed Army and its incorpora- 
tion into the national army; (2) dissolution of the “Soviet 
Republic”; (3) cessation of Communist propaganda that is 



470 AVHITE WORLD AGAIN' 

diametrically opposed to Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s “three prin- 
ciples”; and (4) abandonment of the class struggle.^ Thus, 
though phrased in terms of “surrender” instead of “co-oper- 
ation,” the Kuomintang decides after all to accept the Reds’ 
basis for negotiation of a “reconciliation.” Note that those 
terms still leave the Reds in possession of their little autono- 
mous State, their own army, their organizations, their Party, 
and their “maximum programme” for the future. Or so, at 
least, the Reds can hope! And so, indeed, they do. For on 
March 1 5 the Communist Party, the Soviet Government and 
the Red Army issue a long manifesto requesting the opening 
of negotiations with Nanking. 

What was the purpose of all these complex manceuvres 
by Chiang? Obviously they were skilfully intervmven in 
such a manner as to conciliate the Opposition without weak- 
ening the prestige either of himself or of Nanking. Read in 
their proper sequence, his orders and statements, and the 
resolutions of the Plenat)^ Session, show that he partly satis- 
fied the political demands of all groups of the Opposition — 
just enough to shatter their solidarity and resolution in defy- 
ing him, but not enough to cause a revolt in the Kuomintang. 
Civil war had been stopped, and it was clear that Nanking 
had at last shouldered the task of armed resistance to Japan. 
Promises of greater political freedom had been made, and a 
definite date had been set for the realization of “democ- 
racy.” Finally, a formula had been proposed by which the 
Kuomintang and the Communists might at least live to- 
gether in armed truce, if not in “co-operation.” At the same 
time the Government had nominally rejected the rebels’ de- 
mands, and the Communists’ proposals for “co-operation.” 
It was all very wonderful. 

One should not fail to note that these conciliatory ges- 
tures were forced through by Chiang Kai-shek in the face of 

^ For full text of these important resolutions cf. The China Year 
Book, Shanghai, 1938. 



“point counter point” 471 

considerable antagonism to them in Nanking, and at the 
conclusion of a terrific personal shock which might have 
embittered and unbalanced a man less gifted with foresight, 
and hastened him into precipitate actions of revenge — 
which, in fact, Chiang’s outraged followers in Nanking de- 
manded. But Chiang was shrewder than they. The tremen- 
dous popular demonstration on his safe return from cap- 
tivity was not merely a personal ovation, but a mighty de- 
mand of the people for peace and against civil war, and 
unity in resistance to Japan. Chiang understood that per- 
fectly, and knew that any punitive action he took against 
the North-west might result in deflation of his popularity 
overnight. 

More important, the incident had revealed deep fissures 
in bis own edifice of power. He knew how easily these 
might enlarge into fatal cracks, bringing down the whole 
scheme in ruins. And he saw now with clear vision the great 
advantage to himself of a peace in which the last of those 
fissures could be obliterated. It was real genius of political 
strategy that he did not ignore the promises made in Sian, 
that he took no immediate overt revenge against his captors, 
that he tactfully employed a policy combining just the right 
weight of threat with the necessary softening of concession. 
In this way he eventually succeeded in breaking up the 
North-west bloc (his first objective), and peacefully trans- 
ferred the Tungpei Army from Shensi into Anhui and Ho- 
nan, while the Hsipei Army of General Yang Hu-cheng was 
reorganized under the central command. In February, Nan- 
king troops were able to occupy Sian and its environs with- 
out disturbance or opposition, and in the following month 
negotiations were opened with the Communists. 



J 

Lang Sy„e? 

POR the Communists ' ~ — — 

'>«vA„ti.Red'2lt «n«Co° 1 

^"“Ons already memi^"’ ''"''““s other orri ^ ^ 

“oops and Red tZ %l>tinn e f 

prion of several bZ" ^“oking 

Porarily at jea.r ® ^wmseif to the p" ^^^onstrated 

the Snn • ’ ™ promises of 

"0"' -reasrin She '!" *0 Red A 

;"oe, inciudinfnearr''°"''"'“*eo.reaZ”^ “‘'‘^“R'ori % 
Aeir some o?Z^P'“P™v-- 

speiity thousand sn “"'“^an area her,*'^ R'''er. 

of Austria_the rX^c ™''“’ ™o»-hJpZ 

'«rit XffZ°'*'’o4CZ^^^ 4or, V 

Asia, or perhaps'T.*''’®'^’ *''ocfc the « 

"orii Clunese Turlcestan‘/Zr ''” “*o dirSTco” 



AULD LANG SYNE? 473 

organic value of this frontier in terms of a hypothetical war 
with Japan was obvious. It was one of only two Chinese 
frontiers, and sources of supply, which Japan could not 
blockade. More than half of Chinese Turkestan, which is 
roughly 550,000 square miles in area, was already under a 
government sympathetic to the Chinese Reds, semi-inde- 
pendent of Nanking, and a loose affiliate of the U.S.S.R. 
North-east of it, the Autonomous Outer Mongolian Repub- 
lic, another 900,000 square miles of former dependency of 
China — and the Chinese suzerainty of uffiich was still nom- 
inally recognized, even by Russia — ^\vas now definitely under 
the Red banner, as a result of the military alliance (Mutual 
Defence Pact) concluded with the U.S.S.R. in 1936, 

These three regions of Communist control in what may 
still be called “Greater China” totalled in area roughly a 
third the size of the former Chinese Empire. Separating 
them from physical contact with each other were only politi- 
cally ambiguous buffer districts inhabited by Mongols, Mos- 
lems, and frontiersmen whose ties with Nanking were frag- 
ile, and against whom the threat of Japanese conquest was a 
deepening reality. Those areas might later on be brought 
into the orbit of the “Anti-Japanese United Front,” and un- 
der Soviet influence. Tliat would close in an immense future 
Red base extending from Central Asia and Mongolia into 
the heart of North-west China. But all this realm is back- 
U'ard, some of it barren steppe and desert, with poor com- 
munications, and sparsely populated. It could become a de- 
cisive factor in Eastern politics only in close alliance with 
the advanced industrial and military bases either of the 
U.S.S.R. or Central China, or both. 

Immediate gains of the Chinese Reds were confined to 
these categories: the cessation of civil war, a certain degree 
of liberalization and tolerance in Nanking’s internal policies, 
a stiffening to\vards Japan, and a partial release of the Soviet 
districts from their long isolation. As a result of negotiations 



WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

conducted between General Chang Chung, the Generalis- 
simo’s envoy in Sian, and Chou En-lai, the Reds’ delegate 
there, a number of important changes took place during 
April, May, and June. The economic blockade was lifted. ' 
Trade relations were established benveen the Red districts 
and the outside world. More important, communications be- 
tweemthe two areas were quietly restored. On the frontiers 
the Red Star and the Kuomintang White Sun were crossed 
in symbolic union. 

Mail and telegraph services were partly reopened. The 
Reds purchased a fleet of American lorries in Sian, and oper- 
ated a bus service connecting the principal points in their 
region. Needed technical materials of all sorts began to pour 
in. Most precious to the Communists were books. A new Lu 
Hsun Memorial Library was established in Yenan, and to 
fill it Communist comrades throughout the country sent in 
tons of new literature. Elundreds of young Chinese Commu- 
nists migrated from the great cities to Yenan, the new Red 
capital in north Shensi. By May over 2,000 students had been 
accepted for enrolment in the Red Academy (renamed the 
“Anti-Japanese University”), and some 500 were in the 
Communist Party School. Among them were Mongols, Mos- 
lems, Tibetans, Formosans, and Miao and Lolo tribesmen. 
Scores were also studying in a number of technical training 
institutes. 

Enthusiastic young radicals as well as veteran Party 
vmrkers rolled in from all parts of China, somfe walking over 
great distances. By July, despite the rigours of student life, 
there were so many applicants that no more could be ac- 
commodated. Scores were turned back, to wait for another 
term, when the Reds prepared to receive 5,000. Many 
trained technicians also arrived, and were given work as 
teachers, or in the “construction plan” which was now be- 
gun. In this, perhaps, lay the biggest immediate benefit of 
peace: a base in which freely to train, equip, and discipline 



AULI) LANG SYNE? 475 

new cadres for the ranks of the revolution and the anti- 
Japanese movement. 

Of course, the Kuomintang continued strictly to super- 
vise the Reds’ connections with the outer world. Tliere M'as 
less restriction on the movement of Communists now, but 
there was as yet no open acknowledgment of the fact. Manv 
parties of non-Communist intellectuals also arrived in Red 
Ciiina to investigate conditions there — and manj^ of them 
stayed on, to work. In June, the Kuomintang itself secretly 
sent a semi-ofEcial group of delegates, headed by Hsiao Hua, 
to visit the Red capital. They toured the Soviet districts and 
made appropriately rufescent anti-Japanese speeches before 
huge mass meetings. They acclaimed the return to the anti- 
imperialist United Front between Communists and the Kuo- 
mintang. Nothing of this was allowed to appear in the 
Kuomintang press, however. 

Conditions in the Kuomintang areas also improved for 
the followers of Lenin. The Communist Party was still nom- 
inally illegal, but it became possible to extend its influence 
and widen its organization, for the oppression someu'hat 
diminished. A small but steady stream of political prisoners 
was released from the jails. The special gendarmes (so-called 
Blueshirts) continued their espionage on Communists, but 
kidnappings and torturing ceased. \^'’ord was sent out that 
Blueshirt activities henceforth should centre primarily on 
“pro-Japanese traitors.” A number of the latter tv^ere ar- 
rested, and for the first time several Chinese agents in Japan’s 
pay were actually executed. 

By iMay, in return for these concessions, the Soviets were 
ready to adopt the name of “Special Area Government,” 
and the Red Army had petitioned to be included in the na- 
tional defence forces as a “National Revolutionary Army.” 
Great “all-China” meetings of the Party and Army delegates 
were called in May and June. Decisions were made on meas- 
ures by which the new policies, calling for co-operation 



476 WHITIi WORLD AGAIN 

with the Kuomintang, could be realized. At these meetings 
the portraits of Lenin, Marx, Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, Chu Teh 
and other Red leaders appeared beside those of Chiang Kai- 
shek and Sun Yat-sen! 

These phenomena reflected a general disposition on the 
part of the Reds to make necessary changes in form and 
nomenclature, while retaining the essential content of their 
doctrine and programme, and their autonomous existence. 
Sun Yat-sen’s San Min Chu I — the “three principles” of 
democracy, nationalism, and livelihood to which the Kuo- 
mintang pays specious homage — were once more honoured 
by the Communists, as during the Great Revolution. They 
were not the San Mbi Chu 1 of Chiang Kai-shek, for the Reds 
brought to them theu' own Marxist interpretation. Marxism, 
and the basic tenets of social revolution, it was quite clear, 
they would never give up. Every new step taken, every 
change made, was examined, debated, decided, and inte- 
grated in terms of Marxism — and the proletarian Revolution, 
which the Communists did not abandon as their ultimate 
purpose. 

The most important changes in Red policy were the ces- 
sation of the practice of confiscation of the landlords’ land, 
the cessation of anti-Nanking, anti-Kuomintang propaganda, 
and the guarantee of equal rights and the voting franchise 
to all citizens, regardless of their class basis in society. Of 
these, the one which most directly affected Red economy 
was, of course, the cessation of land confiscation. This did 
not mean the return of land to the landlords in areas where 
redistribution had already been realized, but an agreement to 
abandon the practice in new districts under Red control. 

To augment the deficiency in income resulting from this 
retreat. Generalissimo Chiang agreed to consider the Soviet 
districts part of the “national defence area,” and pay accord- 
ingly. The first payment to the Reds ($500,000) was deliv- 
ered shortly after Chiang Kai-shek’s return to Nanking. 



AULD LANG SYNE? 477 

Some of the Kuomintang money was used to convert Soviet 
currency, to buy manufactures for their co-operatives — 
now well stocked — and some to purchase needed equip- 
ment. None of it was wasted on salaries. The Commissioner 
of Finance continued to e.\ist on \t'ages of five dollars a 
month! The exact monthly allowance from Nanking was 
still under negotiation when the storm of Japanese invasion 
was gathering in the North — as, indeed, was the whole de- 
finitive working agreement for future co-operation. 

In June the Generalissimo sent his private plane to Sian 
for Chou En-lai, the Reds’ chief delegate, who flew to Ru- 
ling, China’s summer capital. There Chou held further con- 
versations with Chiang Kai-shek and members of the Cabi- 
net Among points discussed was the Communists’ demand 
for representation in the People’s Congress — the Congress 
scheduled to adopt a “democratic” constitution — in Novem- 
ber. It was reported that an agreement v^as reached whereby 
the “Special Area” would be permitted to elect nine dele- 
gates on a regional basis. 

However, these delegates in all probability would not be 
known as “Communists.” Nanking had not openly acknowl- 
edged the so-called “remarriage.” It preferred to regard th( 
relationship rather as the annexation of a concubine whose 
continence had yet to be proved, and one about which, for 
diplomatic reasons, the less said outside family circles the 
better. But even this furtive viesaUiance was an astounding 
and open defiance of Japan, unthinkable a few months pre- 
viously. Meanwhile Japan’s own offer (tlurough Match- 
maker Hirota) of a respectable “anti-Red” marriage with 
Nanking tvas finally spurned. In this was perhaps a last and 
definite indication that Nanking’s foreign policy had under- 
gone a fundamental change. 

Now, all this must seem to be an utterly incomprehen- 
sible denonevient to the innocent Occidental observer un- 
skilled in Chinese politics, and he is likely to make serious 



j.yS AVHITE WORLD AGAIN 

errors of judgment in analysing its significance. Certainly it 
could happen nowhere else in the world but China. After a 
decade of the fiercest kind of civil war, Red and White sud- 
denly burst into “Auld Lang Syne.” What was the meaning 
of it? Had the Reds turned White, and the Whites turned 
Red? Neither one. But surely someone must have won, and 
someone lost? Yes, China had won, Japan had lost. For the 
last decision in this profoundly complicated nvo-way strug- 
gle had been postponed once more by the intervention of a 
third ingredient — ^Japanese imperialism. 

It is therefore in terms of the role of imperialism in the 
Chinese revolution that we must seek an outline of the fu- 
ture against Red horizons. 


4 >- — 

6 

Red Horizons 

< 

T o “EXPLAIN” the Chinese revolution, to explore its 
rich mines of social and political experience, these are 
the tasks of quite other books than the present one. But even 
in these few remaining pages it may be possible to suggest 
a general chart of understanding for the voyager down the 
hurrying stream of this many-channelled liistory. 

There was an accomplished social scientist named Lenin. 
“Histor}’" generally,” he wrote, “and the history of revolu- 
tions in particular, is always richer in content, more varied, 
more many-sided, more lively and ‘subtle,’ than the best par- 
ties and the most class-conscious vanguards of the most ad- 


RED HORIZOXS 


479 

vanced class imagine. This is understandable, because the 
best vanguards express the class consciousness, the will, the 
passion, the fantasy of tens of thousands, while the revolu- 
tion is made, at the moment of its climax and exertion of all 
human capabilities, by the class consciousness, the will, the 
passion, and the fantasj'' of tens of millions who arc urged on 
by the very acutest class struggle.”^ 

The observation is apposite to China. WTat Lenin ad- 
mitted in one sense was simply the fallibility of Communist 
prognostication, the tendency of the Communist very often 
to confuse his emotional wish-fancy with realitt'', to suffer 
from delusions that identify “class consciousness” of the 
“thousands” with the “fantasy” of the “millions.” And this 
may be no proof of the fraiit)* of the method of dialectical 
materialism, but of the frailty of the dialectician. It explains 
why hiprecorr, the organ of the Communist International, 
or the New Masses, for example, are sometimes as mistaken 
in their analysis of given historic possibilities as are The 
Times or Topol o dTtalia. 

In what ways has Cliinesc histor}'^ proved “richer in con- 
tent, more varied, more many-sided, more lively and ‘sub- 
tle’,” than the Communist theoreticians foresaw a decade or 
so ago? To be specific, why had the Red Arm}' failed to win 
power in China, despite its heroic and exhausting struggle? 
Before answering tliis, one must recall again, and keep 
clearly in mind, the Communist conception of the Chinese 
revolution, and of its main objectives. 

A popular and never-dying notion of the Communist 
movement in China is that it is anti-capitalist in cite sense 
that it does not see the necessity for a period of capitalise 
economy, but wants right away to proclaim Socialism. This 
is rubbish. Every pronouncement of the Communists has 
sliown clearl}'- that they recognize the “bourgeois character” 

t 

^ "Tcft-lVing'" Conwnnnsm-. An h-Pvtiilc Disorder, bj' Y. I. Lciiin 
(London, 1934). 



480 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

of the present revolution. The struggle/has been not over 
the nature of the revolution so much as over the nature of 
its leadership. The Communists recognize that the duties of 
that leade.i'ship are to realize, as quickly as possible, two pri- 
mary historic tasks; first, to overthi-ow foreign imperialisni 
and establish national independence (that is, liberate China 
from its semi-colonial status); second, to overthrow the 
power of the landlords and gentry, and establish democracy 
(that is, liberate the masses from “semi-feudalism”). Only 
after those tasks have been accomplished, the Communists 
foresee, will it be possible to move towards Socialism. 

But how can these victories be won.^ For a while the 
Communists hoped to win them 'with the bourgeoisie. But 
when the counter-revolution occurred in 1927, when the 
Kuomintang (the party of the landlords and bourgeoisie) 
abandoned the revolutionary method against both imperial- 
ism and “feudalism,” they became convinced that “only a 
worker-peasant democratic dictatorship, under the hegem- 
ony of the proletariat” could lead the bourgeois revolution 
— which in China did not assume a definitive form immedi- 
ately after the overthrow of the imperial monarchy, but 
only at the time of the Great Revolution, 1925-19x7. 

All this may sound troublesome to anyone unfamiliar 
with the terminology of Communist logic. There is, of 
course, a tremendous body of literature behind the whole 
theory (for a starter, see Stalin’s Abotit the Opposition), if 
the reader cares to investigate it. Here I shall be content 
■udth the bare statement of the thesis. To put what has been 
said above in other terms, the Communist conception of tfie 
revolution was this. A period of national capitalism in China 
was inevitable, but could only be achieved simultaneously 
with the elimination of foreign colonial power in the cities, 
together with the liberation of the peasant masses, by giving 
them land through the break-up of estates, and the landlords’ 
economic, political, and social power in the villages. 



RED HORI 20 NS 


481 

The Communists said that the Chinese capitalist class was 
not a true bourgeoisie, but a “colonial bourgeoisie.” It was 
a “comprador class,” with the character of an excrescence 
of the foreign finance and monopoly capitalism which it 
primarily served. It was too weak to lead the revolution. It 
could achieve the conditions of its own freedom onlv 

j ✓ 

through the fulfilment of the anti-imperialist movement, the 
elimination of foreign domination. But only the workers and 
peasants could lead such a revolution to its final victory. 
And the Communists intended that the workers and peasants 
should not turn over the fruits of that victory to the neo- 
capitalists whom they were thus to release, as had happened 
in France, Germany, Italy — everywhere, in fact, except in 
Russia. Instead, they should retain power throughout a kind 
of “N.E.P.” period, a brief epoch of “controlled capitalism,” 
and then a period of State capitalism, followed at last by a 
speedy transition into Socialist construction, with the help 
of the U.S.S.R. All this is indicated quite clearly in Fiinda-^ 
mental Laws of the Chinese Soviet Republic} 

“The aim of the driving out of imperialism, and destroy- 
ing the Kuomintang,” repeated Mao Tse-tung in 1934,' is to 
unify China, to bring the bourgeois democratic revolution 
to fruition, and to make it possible to turn this revolution 
into a higher stage of Socialist revolution. This is the task 
of the Soviet.” 

But what, considering the alpine obstacles of which they 
were fully aware, made the Chinese Communists think in 
1927 that they could succeed in such a mighty leap across a 
vast chasm of history? Probably chiefly the example of the 
Russian October Revolution. That tremendous pulsation 
hurled the Russian people from feudal monarchy right on 
to the plateau of Socialism. And it was made possible by uvo 
conditions which, it was argued, might be reproduced in 

^ Martin Lawrence, London, 1934. 

“ Cf. Red Chim, op, cit. 



482 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

China. Trotsk)^ worded it most simply: “a drawing together 
and mutual interpenetration of two factors, belonging to 
completely different historic species: a peasant war — ^that is, 
a movement characteristic of the dawn of bourgeois devel- 
opment — and a proletarian insurrection, the movement sig- 
nalizing its decline.’”^ 

At the apex of the Great Revolution in China there was 
present the necessary revolutionary mood among both the 
peasant masses and the proletariat. But there were many dif- 
ferences from the situation which had produced the Russian 
revolution. One of these was very great. Survivals of feudal- 
ism were even more pronounced in Russia than in China, but 
China was a semi-colonial country, an “oppressed nation,” 
Avhile Russia was an imperialist country, an “oppressor na- 
tion.” In the Russian revolution the proletariat had to con- 
quer only a single class, its own native bourgeois-imperialist 
class, while the Chinese revolution had to contend with an 
indigenous enemy of dual personality — both its own nascent 
bourgeoisie and the entrenched interests of foreign imperial- 
ism. Theoretically, in the beginning, the Chinese Commu- 
nists expected this dual nature of their enemy to be offset by 
the dual nature of their own assault, which would be aided 
by their “proletarian allies” of the world, and the “toilers 
of the U.S.S.R.” 

The reasons for the failure of the Communists to capture 
power after 1927 are essentially quite simple. The most im- 
portant one lay in the character and conditions of existence 
of the Chinese industrial proletariat. Numerically very small 
— there were scarcely 4,000,000 industrial workers in China 
— inexperienced, poorly educated, enfiladed with disease, 
under-nourishment, and terror, further weakened by a pre- 
ponderance in its midst of slave-child and female labour, in- 
describably exploited by both native and foreign capital, 

^ Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revobitio77, vol. i, p. 70 
(London, 1932). 



RED HORIZONS 483 

this class would have found it difficult to assert its political 
v'ill even in an independent China. But the worst condition 
of its enslavement lay in the concentration of modern in- 
dustry in China in zones of foreign control, and the isolation 
of the workers in these zones from each other. 

Nearly half of all the industrial workers of China hud- 
dled in Shanghai, under the gunboats of half a dozen of the 
world’s great powers. In Tientsin, Tsingtao, Shanghai, Han- 
kow, Hongkong, Kowloon, and other spheres of imperialism 
were probably three-quarters of all the industrial workers 
of China. Shanghai provided the classic prototype of them 
all. Here you could see British, American, French, Japanese, 
Italian, and Chinese soldiers, sailors, and police, all the forces 
of world imperialism combined with native gangsterism and 
the comprador bourgeoisie, the most degenerate elements in 
Chinese society, “co-operating” in wielding the truncheon 
over the heads of the hundreds of thousands of unarmed 
workers. 

Rights of freedom of speech, assembly, or organization 
were denied these workers. Mobilization of the industrial 
proletariat in China for political action was utterly incon- 
ceivable as long as the dual system of native and foreign po- 
licing power was maintained. Only once in history had it 
been broken — ^in 1927 — when for a few days Chiang Kai- 
shek made use of the workers to secure his victor}'^ over the 
northern warlords. But immediately afterwards they were 
suppressed in one of the most demoralizing blood-baths in 
history, with the sanctification of the foreign powers and 
the financial help of foreign capitalists. 

All attempts at insurrection in the cities were thus 
doomed to failure. Nanking could and did count upon the 
security of the industrial bases held by the foreign powers 
in the treaty ports — and on their troops, their guns, their 
cruisers, and their inland police, the river gunboats, and on 
their wealth, their press, their propaganda, and their spies. 



484 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

ft does not matter that instances of the direct participation 
of these powers in actual warfare against the Red Army 
were few. They occurred on the occasions when such action 
was necessary. But their chief services were rendered by 
keeping the industrial workers immobilized, by furnishing 
Nanking with munitions and aeroplanes, and by entering 
into a conspiracy which complacently denied the very exist- 
ence of civil war by the simple device of calling the Com- 
munists “bandits,” so that the embarrassing question of “non-, 
intervention committees” (as in- the case of Spain) was never 
even allowed to arise. 

With the workers thus powerless from the beginning, 
and unable to win a single important industrial base in the 
cities, the advanced leaders of the proletariat were obliged 
to fall back on the rural districts, where the Communist 
movement, while retaining the aims and ideology of Social- 
ism, in practice assumed the economic character of an agrar- 
ian revolution. In the rural areas the Reds hoped eventually 
to build up sufficient strength to be able to attack Nanking 
first in urban bases where foreign influence was less firmly 
established,^ and later — with the help, they hoped, of the 
world proletariat — to invest the citadels of foreign power 
in the treaty ports. 

But while the imperialist powers were the objective allies 
of Nanking against Communism, the assistance expected - 
from the world proletariat failed to materialize. Although 
in the Covtmimist Intel-national Frograiimte^ it was clearly 
recognized that successful proletarian movements in semi- 
colonial countries such as China “will be possible only if 
direct support is obtained from the countries in which the 
proletarian dictatorship is established” {i.e., in the U.S.S.R.), 

^ Yet even when in 1930 the Reds captured Changsha, a city far 
inland and comparatively unimportant to foreign imperialism, they 
were forced to give it up under a fierce bombardment of British, 
American and Japanese gunboats. 

“ London, 1929. 



RED HORIZONS 485 

the Soviet Union in fact did not extend to the Chinese com- 
rades the promised “assistance and support of the proletarian 
dictatorship” in any degree commensurate with the need. 
On the contrary, the great help, amounting to intervention, 
which the Soviet Union gave to Chiang Kai-shek until 1927 
had the objective influence of assisting him into power — 
although, at the same time, it helped create the revolutionary 
opposition in the Red Army movement that arose later on. 
Of course, the rendering of direct aid to the Chinese Com- 
munists after 1927 became quite incompatible with the posi- 
tion adopted by the U.S.S.R. — ^for to do so would have been 
to jeopardize by the danger of international w'^ar the whole 
programme of Socialist construction in one country. Never- 
theless, it must be noted that the influence of this factor on 
the Chinese revolution w^as very great. 

Deprived of an ally, the Chinese Communists continued 
to struggle alone for the “hegemony of the bourgeois revo- 
lution,” believing that deep changes in internal and inter- 
national politics would release new forces in their favour. 
They w’^ere quite mistaken. The result w^as a prolonged con- 
vulsion which brought to the Chinese masses all the anguish 
of political parturition, without the final consequence of 
an heir. 

Nanking’s power remained relatively secure in the great 
urban centres, for the reasons mentioned, but in the villages 
it developed only very slowdy. Paradoxically — and dialecti- 
cally — this rural anaemia of the bourgeoisie was traceable 
to the same source as Nanking’s strength in the cities — ^to 
foreign imperialism. For while imperialism was eager enough 
to “co-operate” in preventing or suppressing urban insur- 
rection, or possibilities of it, at the same time it was objec- 
tively engaged — chiefly through Japan, the focus of the sys- 
tem’s point of greatest stress in the Far East — in collecting 
heavy feesTor this service, in the form of new annexations 
of territory (Manchuria, Jehol, Chahar, and East Hopei), 



486 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

new concessions, and new wealth belonging to China. The 
great burdens placed upon Nanking by this newest phase 
of imperialist aggression made it impossible for the Kuo- 
mintang to introduce in the rural areas the necessary capital- 
ist “reforms” — commercial banking, improved communica- 
tions, centralized taxing and policing power, etc. — fast 
enough to suppress the spread of rural discontent and peas- 
ant rebellion. By carrying out the land revolution the Reds 
were able to satisfy the demands of a substantial peasant 
following, take the leadership of part of rural China, and 
even build several powerful bases on an almost purely 
agrarian economy. But meanwhile they could grow no 
stronger in the cities, on whom their enemies continued to 
be based. 

In this situation, the Communists argued that the Kuo- 
mintang’s attacks on the Soviets prevented the Chinese peo- 
ple from fulfilling their mission of “national liberation” in. 
driving out the Japanese, and that the .Kuomintang’s own 
unwillingness to defend the country proved the bankruptcy 
of its leadership. The Communist thesis of the revolution 
was thus validated. But the enraged Kuomintang- retorted 
that the Communists’ attempts to overthrow the Govern- 
ment prevented them from resisting Japan, while the con- 
tinued practice of “Red-banditry” in the interior, despite 
the grave national crisis, retarded the realization of internal 
reforms. The interesting — and again dialectical — thing 
about these Uvo positions was that both were right and both 
v'ere wrong. And here in essence was the peculiar stale- 
mate, the fundamental impotence of this period of the Chi- 
nese revolution. 

Over this decade the imperialist pressure gradually be- 
came so severe, the imperialists’ price for the protection of 
the interests of the Chinese compradores in the cities be- 
came so excessive, that it tended to neutralize the class an- 
tagonisms between the Kuomintang, the party of the hour- 


RED HORIZONS 487 

geoisie and the landlords, and the Kungch’antang, the party 
of the tvorkers and peasants. It was precisely because of this 
— ^and because of the immediate events described in the 
foregoing chapters — ^that the Kuomintang and the Com- 
munist Party were thus able, after a decade of ceaseless war- 
fare, to reunite in a synthesis expressed in terms of their 
essential unity on the higher plane of a common antagonism 
against Japanese imperialism. This unity, because of its in- 
ner contradictions, was not stable; it was not permanent; it 
might break up again whenever the internal denials out- 
weighed the present external ones. But its achievement defi- 
nitely concluded an- epoch of revolutionary warfare and be- 
gan a new era. 

What was the chief significance of this decade of politi- 
cal experience? Theoretically it was clearly tlfis: that the 
Communists had been forced to abandon temporarily their 
thesis that “only under the hegemony of the proletariat” 
could the bourgeois democratic movement develop. Instead 
it was acknowledged that only “a union- of all classes” could 
achieve those purposes. Its practical significance was the 
clear recognition of the present leadership — which is here 
synonymous with power — of the Kuomintang in the na- 
tional revolution. For the Reds it had certainly to be con- 
sidered “a great retreat” (as Mao Tse-utng had frankly ad- 
mitted) from the days in Kiangsi, when they fought “to 
consolidate the workers’ and peasants’ dictatorship, to ex- 
tend this dictatorship to the whole country, and to mobilize, 
organize, and arm the Soviets and the masses to fight in this 
revolutionary war.”^ The immediate armed struggle for 
power had ceased. Communist slogans became these: to sup- 
port the central Government, to hasten peaceful unification 
under Nanking, to realize bourgeois democracy, and to 
organize the whole nation to oppose Japan. 

But in such periods “it is necessary,” wrote Lenin, “to 

'^Red Ch'ma^ etc., p. u (London, 1934). 



488 WHITE WORLD, AGAIN 

combine the strictest loyalty to the ideas of Communism 
with the ability to make ail necessary compromises, to hack,’ 
to make agreements, zigzags, retreats, and so on,” and thus, 
although among the Chinese Communists there was this 
great shift in strategy, still they believed it was now possible 
to conduct the contest in a much more favourable atmos- 
phere than in the past. There had been this “exchange of 
concessions,” as Mao Tse-tung said, and an exchange to 
which “there are definite limits.” 

He continued; “Tire Communist Party retains the lead- 
ership on problems in the Soviet districts and the Red Army, 
and retains its independence and freedom of criticism in its 
relations with the Kuomintang. On these points no conces- 
sions can be made. . . . The Communist Party will never 
abandon its aims of Socialism and Communism, it will still 
pass through the stage of democratic revolution of the bour- 
geoisie to attain the stages of Socialism and Communism. 
The Communist Party retains its own programme and its 
own policies.”^ 

Practical gains resulting from these concessions have 
already been discussed. But what guarantees had the Com- 
munists that these gains could be held.^ What guarantees 
were there that the internal peace would be maintained, that 
the promised democracy would be realized, that a policy of 
resistance to Japan would last? 

Quite clearly the Kuomintang would utilize to the fullest 
extent the benefits of the new Communist policy to itself. 
With Nanking’s authority recognised by the only political 
party in China capable of challenging it, Chiang Kai-shek 
would continue to extend his military and economic power 
in peripheral areas where warlord influence was still strong, 
areas such as Kwangsi, Yunnan, Kweichow, and Szechuan. 
Impi’oving his military position all round the Reds, he would 
meanwhile extract political concessions from them in return 
^Report to the Communist Party (Yenan, April 10, 1937). 



, REO HORIZONS 489 

for his temporary toleration. Eventually, by skilful combi- 
nation of political and economic tactics, he hoped so to 
weaken them politically that, when the moment was right 
for the final demand of their complete surrender (which 
he undoubtedly still aspired to secure), he might isolate the 
Red Army, fragmentize it on the basis of internal political 
dissensions, and deal with the recalcitrant remnant as a 
purel}^ regional military problem. 

The Reds were under no delusions about that. Likewise 
they were under no delusions that the promise of democracy 
could be fulfilled without a continued active opposition of 
their own. In upholding the slogans of a full democracy and 
anti-imperialism, which they would never give up, the Reds 
did not worry about minor political concessions, for they 
believed their fundamental political base was indestructible. 
Of course, no party of dictatorship in history ever 3delded 
up one scrap of its power to the people except under the 
heaviest pressure, and the Kuomintang would prove no ex- 
ception. The achievement of even the measure of “democ- 
racy” now in prospect would have been impossible with- 
out the ten-year presence of an armed Opposition. Indeed, 
without that Opposition no democracy would have been 
necessary, and no State power with the degi'ee of centraliza- 
tion which we now began to witness in China would have 
been conceivable. For the growth of democracy, like the 
maturing of the modern State itself, is a manifestation of the 
need for a power and mechanism in which to attempt to 
reconcile contradictions inherent in capitalist society — the 
basic class antagonisms. That is the simplest statement of 
bourgeois democracy. 

These contradictions were not diminishing in China, but 
rapidly increasing, and, to the extent that they sharpened, 
the State had to take recognition of them. The achievement 
of internal peace itself made it inevitable, if that peace was 
to last, that Nanking reflect a wider, representation of social 



^90 WHITE WOULD AGAIN 

stratifications. This did not mean that there was any likeli- 
hood of the Kuomintang quietly signing its own death-war- 
rant by genuinely realizing bourgeois democracy, and by 
permitting the Communist Party to compete with it in open 
election campaigning (for it is quite possible that the vote 
of the peasantry alone would give the Communists an over- 
whelming majority), although that is what the Communists 
and other parties demanded, and would continue to agitate 
for. But it did mean that some recognition of the demands 
of the majority would have to be made by the tiny minority 
which monopolized the State economy and policing power. 
The concession of representation of the Soviets in the Na- 
tional Congress was an indication of that. 

The centripetal spread of economic, political, and social 
interests, the process of so-called “unification” — the , very 
measures which created the system — at the same time re- 
quired, for their own preservation, that ever-widening 
groups be focussed in the centre in an attempt to resolve the 
insoluble — the deepening conflict of class interests. And' the 
more Nanking tended to represent different and wider class 
interests throughout the country — the nearer it came to 
achieving democracy — the more it was forced to seek a 
solution of self-survival by resistance to the increasingly 
greedy demands of Japan. 

The guarantees of increased Communist influence, the 
guarantee against future “annihilation campaigns,” there- 
fore, were seen by the Communists to be inherent in the 
organic economic, social, and political relationships of the 
country — precisely those formations which had resulted in 
the present situation. These were, first of all, a wide popular 
demand among both the armed and unarmed masses for 
continued internal peace, for improved livelihood, for de- 
mocracy, and for national freedom. Secondly, the Commu- 
nist Party’s “guarantees” lay in the leadership it could con- 
tinue to give to the movement for those demands through- 



RED HORIZONS 49 1 

out the country, and in the actual military and political 
fighting strength of the Communist Party. Thirdly, they 
relied on the decade of political experience of the Chinese 
people, which had made manifest the necessity of an his- 
torically momentar)^ sublimation of class differences in the 
common struggle against imperialism. 

In the spring of 1937 temporary diminution in Japa- 
nese pressure on Nanking, the suspension of the invasion of 
Inner Mongolia, the opening of Anglo- Japanese conversa- 
tions for “co-operation imChina,” and the hopes of the Brit- 
ish Government to mediate a Sino-Japanese agreement and 
a “fundamental peace” in the Far East, caused some people 
to wonder whether the Communist estimate of the political 
scene was not in error. Was it not reckless gambling to 
pivot a strategy on the central inevitability of an early Sino- 
Japanese war? Now that internal peace was established in 
China, now that the R^ds had ceased their attempts to over- 
throw the Kuomintang, Japan was really turning a concilia- 
tory face to Nanking, it was argued. Japan’s imperialists 
realized that they had pushed the Chinese bourgeoisie too 
far and too fast along; the road of surrender to fascist reac- 
tion, with the result that China’s internal duel was cancelled 
in the universal hatred of Japan. They now saw the wisdom 
of enforcing a new and friendly policy towards the Chinese 
bourgeoisie, in order to renew the freedom of internal an- 
tagonisms in China. And such a Tokyo-Nanking rapproche- 
ment would destroy the Communists’ political influence, 
which was too heavily based on k'ang jib — the “resist Japan” 
movement. 

But history in flood must seek its outlets according to the 
laV'S of dynamics. It cannot be forced back into its pre-flood 
channels. It was already too late for Japan to close the flood- 
gates. The Communists understood that Japan could not 
revert to a static policy in China even though Japan’s ablest 
leaders realized the imperative necessity for a halt. And this 



492 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

Red prescience seemed fully vindicated with the outbreak, 
on July 8 , of the Liukochiao Incident, for here the brief 
pretence of a Japanese change of heart collapsed. Japanese 
troops, holding “midnight manoeuvres” (quite illegally) on 
Chinese territory at the town of Wanping, about ten miles 
west of Peking, claimed to have been fired on by Chinese 
railway guards. The incident gave the Japanese Army the 
pretext; once more it demonstrated its real necessities. By 
the middle of July the Japanese had rushed over 10,000 
troops into the Peking-Tientsin area, and made new im- 
perialist demands, capitulation to which would have meant 
virtually the acceptance of a Japanese protectorate in North 
China. ' 

The Communists’ conception of that situation, and of 
the kindling events which it must set in motion, was that 
the grotving pressure of the whole nation for resistance not 
only here, but everywhere that new acts of imperialist ag- 
gression M'-ere committed, compelled Nanking to take a po- 
sition in which, if Japan did not reverse her policies and 
make amends for the past, there was no way out but war. 
Which meant that there was no way out but war. And re- 
member that the Communists interpreted such a war not 
only as a struggle for national independence, but as a revo- 
lutionary movement, “because to defeat imperialism in 
China means the destruction of one of its most powerful 
bases” and because the victory of the Chinese revolution 
itself '■’■'will correspond with the victory of the Chinese peo- 
ple agamst Japanese aggression'’ (Mao Tse-tung). Not for 
any important length of time, according to Mao Tse-tung’s 
analysis of the breaking-point politico-economic tension in 
Japan, China, and throughout the world, could this settle- 
ment in human destinies be delayed. 

They foresaw that in this war it would become necessary 
to arm, equip, train, and mobilize tens of millions of people 
in a struggle which could serve the dual surgical function 



RED HORIZONS 493 

of removing the external tumour of imperialism and the in- 
ternal cancer of class oppression. Such a war, they con- 
ceived, could only be conducted by the broadest mobiliza- 
tion of the masses, by the development of a highly politi- 
calized army. And such a war could only be 'Vion under the 
most advanced revolutionary leadership. It could be initi- 
ated by the bourgeoisie. It would be completed only by the 
revolutionary workers and peasants. Once the people were 
really armed and organized on an immense scale the Com- 
munists would do everj^thing possible to establish a decisive 
victory over Japan. 'Diey would loyally march with the 
bourgeoisie as long as it led the resistance. But they would 
be prepared to take over this leadership whenever the Gov- 
ernment faltered, turned “defeatist” and exhibited a willing- 
ness to submit to Japan — a tendency which they anticipated 
would appear soon after the first great losses of the war. 

Of course, the Nanking regime fully understood those 
objectives of the Communists, as did all men of power in 
China. And hence they would seek out ever}'- possible road 
of compromise; the}^ vmuld, if they could avoid the internal 
consequences, make further concessions to Japan, at least 
until the odds seemed very greatl}'- in favour of the regime’s 
abilitt'’ not only to enter a war with pmver, but to emerge 
from it with that power still intact, and with the internal 
revolution still in abeyance. But the Communists were suffi- 
ciently content with their own anal}'sis of the course of 
history behind them to be satisfied with the chart of direc- 
tion which they had chosen for the voyage -ahead, through 
events which would C 077 tpel Nanking to make a stand for 
its own survival. They knew that Nanking might continue 
to vacillate, that Japan might continue to feint and manceu- 
vre in myriad ways, until the utmost agony of antagonism 
was reached benveen the interests of Japanese imperialism 
and the national interests of China externally, and between 
the Chinese and Japanese masses and their bourgeois-land- 



494 WHITE WORLD AGAIN 

lord rulers internally, until the moment when all the physical 
restraints and oppressions became utterly intolerable, the 
barriers of history broke down, the mighty catastrophe bred 
by imperialism was set loose, Frankenstein-like, to destroy 
imperialism, and le deluge swept forward. 

Thus “capitalism digs its own grave,” thus imperialism 
destroys imperialism, in that only a great imperialist war 
will release the forces that can bring to the Asiatic masses 
the arms, the training, the political experience, the freedom 
of organization, and the mortal weakening of the internal 
policing power which are the necessary accessories for any 
conceivably successful revolutionary ascent to power in the 
relatively near future. Whether or not, even then, the 
“armed masses” are likely to follow Communist leadership 
with final success depends upon many variable and now un- 
predictable factors — internal factors first of all, but such 
factors also as the policies in the East of America, Great 
Britain, France, Germany, and Italy, and to the very great- 
est extent the policies of the U.S.S.R. 

And that, I believe, was 'the contour of the Communist 
picture of the future as China waited for Japan to strike. 
One may not follow all of it, but this at least seems certain 
— that what Lenin wrote over twenty years ago is still true 
today: “Whatever may be the fate of the great Chinese 
revolution, against which various ‘civilized’ hyenas are now 
sharpening their teeth, no forces in the world will restore 
the old serfdom in Asia, nor erase from the face of the earth 
the heroic democracy of the popular masses in the Asiatic 
and semi-Asiatic countries.” 

And another thing seemed equally certain. Neither can 
the democratic Socialist ideas for which tens of thousands 
of youths have already died in China, nor the energies be- 
hind them, be destroyed. The movement for social revolu- 
tion in China may suffer defeats, rnay temporarily retreat, 
may for a time seem to languish, may make wide changes in 



RED HORIZONS 


495 

tactics to fit immediate necessities and aims, may even for 
a period be submerged, be forced underground, but it will 
not only continue to mature; in one mutation or another it 
will eventually win, simply because (as this book proves, 
if it proves anything) the basic conditions which have given 
it birth carry within themselves the dynamic necessity for 
its triumph. And that triumph when it comes will be so 
mighty, so irresistible in its discharge of catabolic energy, 
that it will consign to oblivion the last barbarities of im- 
perialism which now enthral the Eastern world. 

But here anyone who finds these conclusions too “alarm- 
ing” is welcome to seek such dialectical comfort as may be 
derived — ^it cannot be denied — by recollecting the quotation 
that opened this chapter, for in the realm of speculation the 
subjective influence is of course very active. 

Peking, July 20, 1937, 




Js=- 


EPILOGUE 

1944 

4 

W HAT has happened to the Chinese of this book in 
seven years since the Liukochiao Incident, when Ja- 
pan began her attempt to conquer China in July, 1937? You 
may wish to know where they are today, how strong they 
are, whether their expectations have been fulfilled, how 
they have fought the Japanese, what kind of programme 
they offer for post-war China, and how it compares with 
their former policies. Obviously I can do no more in the 
space allotted to me than outline the answers to such ques- 
tions. Fortunately recent events are a direct continuation of 
the main story already told here so that the summary re- 
quires little new background. 

For one thing, the passage of time has fully vindicated 
the judgment of Mao Tse-tung and other Communist lead- 
ers that the achie^’^ement of national unity for the struggle 
against Japan was more important than any other immediate 
objective of the revolutionary movement. Had civil war 
continued after the Japanese invasion, China could never 
have carried out her epic and one-sided fight against en- 
slavement. 

In this perspective the Sian incident now looms as a 
happening of decisive amportance in contemporary Chinese 

497 



49S EPILOGUE, 1 944 

liiscory. Few men today remember how close China came: 
to adherence to the Anti-Comintern pact, just before the 
Sian affair. But it is now quite clear that after it, when the , 
Generalissimo cancelled his plans for a renewed offensive^ 
against the Chinese Reds, there came the final parting of the 
ways bet■v^'een Tokyo and Nanking. Sian made certain that; 
China would be on the anti-fascist side of the coming world 
struggle. 

In other respects time has confirmed the validity of ideas 
for which the revolutionaries whose stories are told in these ' 
pages fought and died. It has brought immense prestige to 
the survivors, and to their greatly increased following, dur- 
ing the long ordeal now drawing to a close. A revolutionary 
movement demands of its leader the ability to know a little; 
ahead of anyone else what is going to happen; and in this' 
respect Adao Tse-tung has been so successful that millions ' 
of Chinese now repose as much confidence in his judgment 
as in that of Chiang Kai-shek. 

At the time Mao made some important political predic-_ 
tions to me, in 1936, they seemed to many people preposter- 
ous, Few men then believed the Communist Party could en- 
dure. Fewer still believed that a truce between the Kuo- 
mintang and the Kungch’antang (Communist Party) could 
outlast the war. Only a handful of foreign experts doubted 
that Japan could divide China and compel her to submit 
in a few months. 

However they may feel about the Communists and what 
they now represent, most Chinese will admit — and in the 
admission one often detects a secret pride — that Mao Tse- 
tung accurately analyzed the internal and international 
forces involved, and correctly depicted’ the general shape 
of events to come. Civil war did end and the Communist 
Party and the Red Army not only survived but were 
strengthened, until today both forces are indestructible. 
Mao’s suggestion that at a certain stage in the war part of 



EPILOGUE, 1944 499 

«-he Kuomintang would betray China and turn puppet for 
the Japanese was long resented; but after the defection of 
Wang Ching-wei, deputy leader of the party second only 
;o the Generalissimo, it could not be denied that he had 
intimately understood the contradictory elements in the 
government. 

Again Mao predicted that the war would be long and 
dilBcult, and this must be one of the few instances in history 
in which an advocate of armed struggle has not promised his 
adherents a speedy triumph. His candour disarmed in ad- 
vance the kind of defeatism that preys upon shattered il- 
lusions. On the other hand Mao helped to build up a more 
durable self-confidence in the nation by correctly estimat- 
ing the enormous staying power guaranteed by China’s own 
human and material resources, when mobilized in a revolu- 
tionary way. And he indicated the kind of strategy and 
tactics which China would have to adopt to hold on until 
the national war merged with the world war, including 
Japanese attack on the British, the Dutch and the Americans, 
which he warned was inevitable. 

Today the Chinese Communists provide the leadership 
in North China for what is much the largest guerrilla or- 
ganization in the world. Stretching from the Yangtze Valley 
to the Mongolian steppe, and to the mountains and rivers 
of southern Manchuria, thousands of villages behind the 
Japanese lines make up the pattern of this “people’s war.” 
Its organizers are youths chiefly inspired and trained by the 
1 8th Group Army — the combined Eighth Route and New 
Fourth Armies. These forces are led by Chu Teh, Peng 
Teh-huai and other veterans of the former Red Army of 
China, who now have behind them an amazing record of 
survival and growth through seventeen years of continuous 
civil and national war. 

Foreign observers who visited the guerrilla districts in 
1943 estimated that behind the Japanese lines the i8th 



JOO EPILOGUE, 1944 

Group Army had organized and given crude training to 
militia numbering about seven million people. These were 
the reserves of the main fighting units. In addition, there 
were said to be some twelve million members of various 
anti-Japanese associations which helped to clothe, feed, 
house, equip and transport the regular troops, and were 
their eyes and ears. Official data ^ showed partisan penetra- 
tion in 455 hsien (or counties) of North China and in 52,- 
800 villages, with a population of more than sixty million 
people. From three-fifths to two-thirds of the so-called 
“conquered territory” was in guerrilla hands most of the 
time. 

For nearly seven years the Japanese had been trying to 
exterminate these tireless enemies. Eighth Route regulars 
numbered hardly 50,000 men in 1937, and diverted only a 
few divisions of Japanese troops. But that vanguard multi- 
plied in every direction. In 1944 more than half of Japan’s 
350,000 troops in China proper (excluding Manchuria) and 
some 200,000 puppet troops, were occupied in defending 
fortified areas against the 1 8th Group Army and in fighting 
punitive actions against it. Japanese military reports put its 
strength at from 500,000 to 600,000. 

In every one of the provinces occupied by the Japanese, 
which cover an area three times the size of France, partisans 
had set up village and county councils. They had estab- 
lished four “border” governments in bases held throughout 
the war, except for brief intervals; and each of these regional 
govei'nments represented liberated areas of several neigh- 
bouring provinces. Wherever practicable there were elec- 
tions by direct and secret ballot, and this was almost invari- 
ably the case in the village and county councils. 

These behind-the-lines regimes performed nearly all the 
functions of normal administration. They had their own 
postal system and radio communications. They published 

^ North Chiva Front, Chungking, 1943. 



EPILOGUE, 1944 . 501 

their own newspapers, magazines and books. They main- 
tained an extensive system of schools and enforced a re- 
formed legal code recognizing sex equality and adult suf- 
frage. They regulated rents, collected taxes, controlled trade 
and issued currency, operated industries, maintained a num- 
ber of experimental farms, extended agricultural credit, had 
a grain-rationing system, and in several places had under- 
taken fairly large afforestation projects. 

How did all this develop? It is a long story from the 
civil-war period to the approaching liberation of China, but 
a quick synopsis is necessary to bring us up to date — to the 
approaching date of world victory over fascism. 

The defence perimeter held by Japanese troops in China 
in 1944 was already stabilized before the end of 1939. When 
the enemy originally moved into the conquered provdnces 
most of the old officials of the Kuomintang government, as 
well as its troops, withdrew to the west and south. Behind 
them the administrative bureaucracy collapsed. In the cities 
it was replaced by Japanese and puppets, but a kind of po- 
litical vacuum existed in the hinterland towns and villages, 
the interstices between enemy garrisons. Into that tempo- 
rary vacuum moved the former Red Army of China — ^with 
arms, with teachers, and with faith in the people’s strength. 
' This movement began Avith the Generalissimo’s acqui- 
escence. It was made possible first of all, as we have seen, 
by Marshal Chang Hsueh-liang’s earlier “detention” of the 
Generalissimo at Sian, in order to persuade him to stop 
fighting the Reds and unite with them against Japan. After 
the Japanese invaded North China, an agreement was 
reached which ended a decade of civil Avar. This proidded 
that the Red Army should be incorporated into the national 
forces, that the Soviets should be abolished in favour of a 
gOA’-ernment in Avhich all classes Avould be represented, and 
that the Communists Avould abandon the slogans of class 
warfare and cease confiscating and redistributing the land. 



502 EPILOGUE, 1 944 

The Northern Red forces dropped the Red flag and the 
Red Star and accepted the designation “Eighth Route 
Arm)L” South-east of Shanghai other Red remnants under 
Generals Yeh Ting and Han Ying were regrouped in 1938 
as the “New Fourth Army.”^ 

But the Kungch’antang continued to direct the reorgan- 
ized Red forces, just as Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang (or 
Nationalist Party) maintained control of the other Chinese 
troops. Communists asserted that until the Kuomintang gov- 
ernment legally recognized the rights of other political par- 
ties to exist they had no guarantee against a renewed attempt 
to exterminate them. They promised to surrender complete 
command of their forces to a constitutional, representative 
regime, as soon as the Kuomintang fulfilled its pledges to 
the people in that respect. 

TTie Chinese Reds had always stated that their pro- 
gramme was to lead China’s “bourgeois-democratic revolu- 
tion,” and this continued to be their aim during the “war 
for national emancipation.” In practise they had won their 
following by enforcing an immediate two-sided programme 
of social, economic and political reforms (the overthrow 
of feudalism) and by leading the fight against imperialism. 
Socialism was and is an ultimate, but admittedly distant, 
goal. 

Both the Kuomintang and the Kungch’antang today 
claim to be the legitimate heirs of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, founder 
of the Chinese Republic. Both supported him in the early 
days of the revolution. Even after 1937 there was no agree- 
ment over the practical application of Sun Yat-sen’s “Peo- 
ple’s Three Principles” of “nationalism, livelihood and dem- 
ocracy.” 

The Communists still regarded Sun as a social revolu- 

^ Cf. The Battle for Asia, by Edgar Snow, N. Y., 1941, for an ac- 
count of the reorganization of the Red Army and growth of partisan 
warfare from 1937 to 1941. 



EPILOGUE, 1944 505 

tionary and demanded a radical interpretation of his prin- 
ciples. Briefly, they said they wanted a “thoroughgoing 
democratic revolution,” with equalization of land ownership, 
universal suffrage, constitutional government establishing 
the people’s power, and similar reforms that had accom- 
panied the overthrow of feudalism elsewhere. The Kuo- 
mintang still interpreted the Three Principles more conser- 
vatively. As the party still drew its chief internal support 
from the landlord class, it was naturally opposed to radical 
land reform. In general it wanted to keep present economic 
and political relationships intact and to superimpose its dic- 
tatorship on the old Chinese semi-feudal structure. If it ac- 
knowledged the legality of other parties and their conflict- 
ing interpretations, especially if it conceded adult suffrage, 
that structure would almost certainly be overthrown. 

But while such issues of democracy and livelihood re- 
mained unsettled, the Communists and Nationalists at least 
agreed upon the principle of “nationalism” when Japan in- 
vaded the country. The Reds then took their military orders 
from the Generalissimo. In 1937 he sent them into the battle 
line in North China, where many Kuomintang leaders con- 
fidently expected them to be swallowed up in the Japanese 
drive. They did not disintegrate in> that way, however, as 
some of the northern warlord armies did. Tliey met the at- 
tack and were defeated in the cities, but instead of retreating 
or surrendering they withdrew to the villages and hills and 
continued fighting. 

Infiltrating all the northern provinces -ufith experienced 
partisan leaders and political organizers, they soon enlisted 
valuable reinforcements from a thickening stream of refu- 
gees fleeing from the cities: students, workers and various 
professional men and women, including some intellectuals 
belonging to the non-Communist political parties, long sup- 
pressed by both the Chinese and Japanese regimes. Cut off 
from the rear, whole divisions of defeated Chinese troops 



504 EPILOGUE, 1 944 

Carrie under their leadership. In this way, and through vic- 
tories over the Japanese and puppet troops, the rifle power 
of the Communist forces steadily increased. By 1939 their 
strongholds had become so formidable that the Japanese 
were compelled to launch a full-dress offensive against them. 
They went on doing so semi-annually ever after that. 

The first partisan regime entirely inside occupied terri- 
tory was set up in the mountains of Northeastern Shansi, 
east of the Yellotv River, and included areas as far north as 
Jehol, or Inner Mongolia. Another regime, with its capital 
in South-east Shansi, directed operations in recovered terri- 
tory which stretched for over 300 miles across Southern 
Hopei and Shantung eastward to the Yellow Sea. There was 
a third border region centring in Northern Kiangsu, north 
of Shanghai, which was controlled by the New Fourth 
Army, with nearly 100,000 troops. A fourth regional gov- 
ernment was established in the mountainous country north 
of the Yangtze River above Hankow, where the borders of 
Anhui and Hupeh enclose the southern extremity of Honan. 

Political and military methods used to organize the peo- 
ple borrowed heavily from the pattern developed in the old 
Soviet districts of North Shensi. After the Soviet govern- 
ment was abolished in 1937, a “Shensi-Kansu-Ninghsia Bor- 
der Area Government” took its place. This regime re- 
nounced class warfare, stopped redistributing the land, and 
legalized all anti-Japanese parties and organizations. Suffrage 
was extended to all citizens over the age of eighteen. Private 
enterprise was encouraged, and the economy was frankly 
described as “state-controlled capitalism.” 

The town of Yenan, the so-called “mother of the Chi- 
nese partisans,” became the capital of the Shensi-Kansu- 
Ninglrsia Border Government. I revisited Yenan in 1939, 
after the new government was established. It remained until 
1944 the last trip made there by any foreign newspaper 



EPILOGUE, 1 944 505 

correspondent, for soon af tenvards the region was cut off by 
the Kuomintang’s military blockade. 

In this area I saw that the Yenan government had built 
up an intelligent and prosperous community life. Free com- 
pulsory primary education was introduced, and middle 
schools, technical schools and colleges, including a College 
for Women, were established. Thousands of youths walked 
hundreds of miles across enemy-held territory to reach 
Yenan and study in its institutions. There was a public health 
sendee and several hospitals. There were many industrial 
co-operatives and also some state-owned industries, but pri- 
vate trade also flourished. Peasants in this “Shen-Kan-Ning’' 
region opened up over 600,000 acres of new land and with 
government help tens of thousands of refugees from occu- 
pied China were settled here. Opium was extirpated. In the 
areas I saw, prostitution and child slavery were effectively 
prohibited, and there were no beggars. The idle were put to 
work. Evet}^ village had its elected council and every county 
likewise. The regional government was elected by delegates 
chosen by popular vote — ^for the first time in Chinese 
history. • 

On the other side of the Yellow River, behind Japanese 
lines, the organization of the social, political and economic 
life tvas naturally more difficult than in Yenan, but in gen- 
eral the goals, if not always the degree of success achieved, 
were comparable. Although newspaper correspondents were 
not able to investigate the Shansi and Hopei areas, the vari- 
ous foreigners who escaped from the Japanese in Peking and 
made thehr way southward across the guerrilla territory 
Iiave given fairly complete pictures of the system which pre- 
vails. Among these observers was Professor William Band, 
of the famous American missionary institution, Yenching 
University, whom I knew Avhen I lectured there for a year 
myself. Another was Professor Michael Lindsay, also of 



5 o 6 epilogue, 1944 

Yenching, whose report of conditions there was published 
in Amerasia Magazine in 1944.^ The most comprehensive 
account of the partisan areas to reach the outside world for 
some time, it was released for publication by the author’s 
father, A. D. Lindsay, Master of Baliol College, Oxford. 

According to Professor Lindsay, the partisan govern- 
ments were elected from candidates nominated directly by 
the people and their organizations. The Chinese partisans 
aimed to establish a united front of all groups and hence the ^ 
Communist Party limited its own members to one-third of 
the total of any elected body. This peculiar policy, was vig- 
orously enforced, according to Lindsay. The purpose wa? 
to give representation in the government to both land- 
owners (except absentee landlords) and merchants, but 
above all to develop political leaders among the poor peas- 
ants and workers. It was “education in democracy by prac- 
tising democracy,” according to the partisan leaders. 

In the mass organizations there were no limitations on 
Communist leadership, however; and these organizations 
were the guerrillas’ sinew and life. They included separate 
unions or associations for farmei's, workers, youth, children 
and women, and membership in each ran into the millions. 
Most important of all such organizations were the self- 
defence corps, the militia and the Youth Vanguards. These 
were crude but basic military organizations which locally 
supported the i8th Group Army’s main forces. 

The hold of the Chinese Communists and the allied par- 
tisan leaders on all these organizations, and the extraordinary 
morale of the troops, traced to their disciplined and demo- 
cratic personalities rather than to Marxist political propa-- 
ganda. G. Martel Hall, former manager of the National City 
Bank in Peking, who was the last American to escape from 
the Japanese across the partisan areas, told me recently that 
there was simply no other way he could explain the success 

^N. Y., March 31, April 14, 1944. '■ 



EPILOGUE, 1944 507 

of the partisan leaders with the peasants, “except through 
their own incorruptibility and honest)’, their energetic pa- 
triotism, their devotion to practical democracy, their faith 
in the common people and the continuous effort they made 
to arouse them to action and responsibility.” 

Mutual hatred of the Japanese provided the atmosphere 
in which these zealots exploited the people’s patriotism, but 
side by side with political reforms went economic and social 
changes. In the case of women the enforcement of laws like 
monogamy, freedom of marriage at the age of consent, free 
education, and suffrage at the age of eighteen, won a sur- 
prising response. Lindsay said there were over 3,000,000 
members of the women’s organizations in the partisan areas. 
Many women had been elected to village and town councils 
and large numbers of young girls carried serious political and 
militaiy responsibilities. 

The primary school system operated widely in all the 
“permanent” ' guerrilla bases and education was free and 
compulsory. In some places as high as 80% of the younger 
children of school age were literate. Space and time do not 
permit me here to offer a detailed description of the eco- 
nomic fabric which supported these areas-, the basic reform ' 
was enforcement of a drastic reduction in land rent. Land of 
absentee landlords was tilled in common; the aim was to cul- 
tivate all cultivable land. Taxes were collected mainly in 
grain, and were kept at about 10% of those demanded by 
the Japanese. Consumers’, marketing and industrial co-oper- 
atives were widespread. Lindsay stated that there were over 
4,000 co-operatives in Shansi and 5,000 in Central Hopei 
alone. 

Unimaginable hardships accompanied partisan organiza- 
tion at ever)’' step.’^ While it is true the Japanese failed to 

^For a vivid and almost painfully realistic eye-witness account 
of these sufferings of growth in the midst of war, read Agnes Smed- 
ley’s powerful book, Battle Hymn of China, N. Y., 1943- 



5 o 8 epilogue, 1944 

destroy the partisan forces, or to stop their inctease, they- 
carried out literally thousands of large- and small-scale puni- 
tive expeditions against them. They looted and burned thou- 
sands of villages, raped the womenfolk and slaughtered . 
countless civilians, in a terror aimed to wipe out all thought 
of resistance. The guerrillas always found ways to overcome 
the demoralizing effects of these tactics, but not without 
sacrifices as bitter as any endured in Russia. It was true the 
Japanese were still unable to control any village much be- 
yond the range of their garrisons along North China’s rail- 
ways and roads, but it was also true that their fortified points 
had greatly increased and could now be seized only at a 
very heavy cost. 

So much for background. How did all this affect Ameri- 
can plans to defeat Japan through China? 

“After all, you saved the Kuomintang,” a Chinese intel- 
lectual in Chungking said to me. “It is your baby now and 
you cannot avoid responsibility for its actions.” 

He meant simply that American money, arms and eco- 
nomic aid were given to the Kuomintang authorities, with- 
out any conditions concerning, policies pursued inside China. 
American government representatives had several times 
made it clear to Chungking that we would disapprove of a 
renewal of civil strife during the joint war against Japan. 
But Americans had not gone beyond that nor sought to have 
the blockade lifted against the partisan areas. 

Chungking established its blockade against the i8th 
Group Army when Kuomintang party leaders became in- 
creasingly alarmed by the Communists’ success in recovering 
control of areas behind the Japanese lines. The Generalissimo 
described their activity as “illegal occupation of the national 
territory.” The Kuomintang’s War Areas Political and Party 
Affairs Commission took the position that all the guerrilla 
administrations %vere “illegal” and should be abolished to 
await the re-establishments of the Kuomintang system. 



EPILOGUE, 1944 509 

In 1940 some Kuomintang troops engaged the rear eche- 
lon of the New Fourth Army while it was moving from its 
base south of' the Yangtze River near Shanghai, to an area 
entirely behind the Japanese lines to which it was assigned 
by the Generalissimo. It was apparently a surprise attack and 
the partisans were reportedly outnumbered eight to one. 
The little detachment of about 4,000 was not a combat unit 
and it was easily encircled and annihilated. General Yeh 
Ting, the commander of the New Fourth Army (v^ho was 
himself not a Communist) was wounded and taken prisoner, 
and General Han Ying, the field commander, was killed to- 
gether with many of his staff, some doctors and nurses of 
the medical battalions, a number of convalescent wounded 
soldiers, some cadets, men and women students, and some 
industrial co-operative workers attached to the army. 

The incident failed to liquidate the New Fourth Army, 
however, whose main forces were already north of the 
Yangtze River, fighting Japanese troops there. But it did re- 
open all the old wounds of distrust. The Generalissimo ruled 
that the incident was caused by the New Fourth’s “insubor- 
dination” and thenceforth withdrew all aid not only from 
that army but also from the Eighth Route. 

• For some months previous to the tragedy no part of the 
1 8th Group Army had been paid. From this time on they 
not only received no pay or ammunition but were block- 
aded by a ring of strong government forces from access to 
supplies in Free China, which they might have purchased or 
received as gifts from the people. Ironically enough the 
Kuomintang troops enforcing this blockade were largely 
equipped with Soviet Russian supplies. There were two 
group armies (the 37th and 38th) engaged exclusively in the 
blockading enterprise. American officers suggested that they 
were needed in the campaign to recover Burma, but Chung- 
king considered their “policing role” in the North-west of 
greater importance and there they remained. 



Jio EPILOGUE, 1944 

It was against this anomaly that Mme. Sun Yat-sen, the 
Generahssimo’s sister-in-law, and revered widow of the 
founder of the Kuomintang, protested in a statement of ex- 
traordinary candour which was published abroad in Febru- 
ary, 1944. “Reaction and fascism are strong in China,” she 
warned. “This is proved by the diversion of part of our 
National Army to the blockading of the guerrilla areas, by 
the oppression of the peasantry, and by the absence of a true 
labour movement. . . . Some Chinese are preparing to de- 
stroy the guerrilla bases in North Shensi.” 

All these facts were known to our army, to the State 
Department and to Americans in China, but probably few 
Americans at home realized that our Lend-Lease aid went 
exclusively to the Kuomintang authorities. We maintained 
no consular representation in Yenan and no military liaison 
with the partisans. All our supplies flown over the Hump 
into China — modern bombers and fighters, artillery, trans- 
port and ammunition — supported only the one party, of 
course. Financial aid sent to China by the C.I.O., A.F.L;, and 
Railway Brotherhoods also went exclusively to Kuomintang 
groups — ^under which labour had virtually no freedom of 
press, speech or organization. 

What could be done about this admittedly internal' affair 
of China? Our new treaty with China (1943) renounced ex- 
traterritoriality rights and restored full sovereignty to the 
Chinese government. Could we now tell the present govern- 
ment how to run its business without being branded neo- 
imperialists? But inevitably the war had already caused us to 
intervene in support of the Kuomintang, in terms of eco- 
nomic and military aid. Was it not merely playing ostrich to 
pretend that our future economic help to China did not 
carry implicit political responsibilities of the gravest kind? 

Could the Communists and the partisan troops united 
with them be destroyed by force? The Kuomintang spent 
ten fruitless years in the attempt, before 1937. Even with the 



EPILOGUE, 1944 51 1 

use of American bombers and fighters on his side, the Gen- 
eralissimo was not likely to secure greater success than the 
Japanese had had against these experienced guerrilla- war- 
riors. It had become a physical impossibility for the Chung- 
king government to destroy this opposition in anything 
short of a long and bloody war, fully backed by Allied 
troops. An interesting consciousness of immensely increased 
strength was evident in all recent declarations by Chinese 
Communist leaders, who now insisted that their party and 
its troops must be treated “on a basis of equality” with the 
Kuomintang. Typical of this new firmness was the speech 
made by Chou En-lai, a veteran Red Army commander, 
after his return to Yenan from Chungking late in 1943. Here 
is a significant excerpt; 

“Has the Chinese Communist Party lost its backing? It 
is true that during its birth and development the Chinese 
Communist Party received help from the Comintern. But 
the backbone of the party is not the Comintern but the Chi- 
nese people. Our party is a party of the masses. It has 800,000 
members and 500,000 tffoops and it has united over 100 mil- 
lion people in blood and flesh through actual fighting. 

“We are firmly supporting national unity. We are still 
prepared to talk with the Kuomintang, to discuss how to 
avoid the danger of civil war, how to solve existing prob- 
lems. However, such negotiations must be sincere, equals 
• meeting equals, mutually making concessions. It must not be 
negotiation on one hand, conflicts and clashes on the other; 
letters of liaison going back and forth on the one hand, mass- 
ing of troops on the other. . . . We still hope that the au- 
thorities will correct their misguided internal policy and 
carry out Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s ‘People’s Three Principles.’ We 
hope also to co-operate with all other anti-Japanese parties, 
groups and forces on a democratic basis in order to wage the 
M'ar firmly and push on toAA^ards progress.” 

There was also the question of Soviet Russia and what 



512 EPILOGUE, 1944 

her policy would be once she turned her eyes eastward. 
Russian participation in the war on China’s side would obvi- 
ously be incompatible with a Chungking policy of anni- 
hilating Chinese Communists. If we desired to have Russian 
co-operation and understanding in post-war Asia as well as 
post-war Europe, it would seem contradictory for us to fi- 
nance and arm another anti-Communist crusade in China. 

If, on the other hand, Chungking became reconciled to 
the idea of a representative government and re-established 
co-operation with the Communist Party, we could quickly 
increase the tempo of warfare throughout North China and 
Manchuria. Allied officers who knew this situation inti- 
mately stated that it was feasible to fly into the recovered 
areas large amounts of ammunition and explosives, airborne 
troops to help the partisans wreck Japanese communications, 
and the means to force the enemy to double or treble his 
garrisons in China. Even with their present strength the par- 
tisans could hold airfields in Shantung and Kiangsu, where 
our bombers could refuel on shuttle flights to Japan. 

The changing international picture grew more and more 
unfavourable to those in China who wanted to have another 
try at annihilating the Communists. In the final analysis the 
Generalissimo was not likely to risk his international pres- 
tige by assuming responsibility for a major fratricidal con- 
flict. Despite pressure from some of his generals, he stated 
that he would solve the Communist-Kuomintang problem 
“purely by political means.” At bottom a realist, the Gen- 
eralissimo must have taken careful note of Winston Church- 
ill’s declaration of support for Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia. 

“The sanest and safest course for us to follow,” said the 
Prime Minister early in 1944, “is to judge all parties and fac- 
tions dispassionately by the test of their readiness and ability 
to fight the Germans and thus lighten the burden of Allied 
troops. This is not a time for ideological preferences for one 
side or the other.” 



514 EPILOGUE, 1944 

forces had refrained from encroaching on any unoccupied 
territory. But in the event the Japanese made a new conquest 
there was little doubt that partisan warfare under the leader- 
ship of the 1 8th Group Army would quickly spread all over 
South China. The same institutions and system prevailing in 
North China might then be established in the villages behind 
the enemy lines, and the partisans, chiefly led by the Com- 
munists, would in fact take over the main tasks of resistance 
on a national scale. 

Thus, by the summer of 1944, it had become manifest 
that the tiny band of youths who had raised the Red flag on. 
the lonely mountain of Chingkanshan far back in 1928, had 
launched a demonstration which evolved into a crusade 
which finally rose to the stature of a national movement of 
such scope that no arbiters of China’s destiny could much 
longer deny its claims to speak for vast multitudes of people. 
The years of bloody civil war, the hazards and triumphs of 
the Long March, the struggle against foreign aggression, 
and through it all the steadfast adherence to a basic purpose 
— the liberation of the oppressed and the assertion of the 
rights of the plain men and women of China to build a gov- 
ernment of, by and for the people — ^u^ere nearing a cul- 
mination. 

Victory of the physical, the spiritual, the intellectual 
forces which first lifted the Red Star over China, was not 
far off — if not the ascendancy of the disputed symbol itself. 

June, 1944 


X 



Index 


O- 


A B C of Conmnmisin, 296, 383 
Abyssinia, 99 

Account of the Long March, An, 

196 note, 215 note 
Agriculture, under Soviet society, 
234-41 

Amerasia Magazine, 506 
America, 87, 88, 105, 106, 494, 
499; funds for famine relief, 
227; oil leases on Shensi, 269; 
Missionary School, 3 r 3 ; wheat 
loan to China, 415; alliance 
souglit, 463; help to Nanking, 
415-16 

American, bombardment of 
Changsha, 286, 484 note; 
sailors in Shanghai, 483 
An Jen Ch’ang, 203-5, 208-9 
An Ting, Soviet established and 
Red Military Headquarters, 
222; spinning school, 269 
An Tsai, 35-6, 39-40, 43-6 
Andrew, Findlay, of Famine Re- 
lief Commission, Report of, 
229-30 

Anhui, Soviets in, 73, 191^ 212, 
2ty» 330-1, 332-9, 504 
“Annihilation,” drives of. See 
. Anti-Red Campaigns 
Anti-Comintern pact, 498 
Anti-Communist New Life 
Movement, 410 

Anti-Imperialist Alovement, 81, 

82, 85 

Anti-Japanese: agreement be- 
ttveen Red Army and Tung- 
pel Army, 22-5, 444-6; ex- 
pedition, 44; theatre, 290; 

515 


dramatic society, 108, 109-16; 
war, 89-go, 91-101, 106-8; ex- 
pedition of Red Army, 10, 
224; policy taught to peas- 
ants, 217-18; political train- 
ing, 377-8, 424-6; rebellion, 
417-18; movement, 431-2, 
436; in North-west, 315-16, 
438-41, 446-7; front, 86, 92; 
united militar}' council, 445, 
456. See also Japan and Jap- 
anese Imperialism. 

Anti-Red Campaigns (“extermi- 
nation” and “annihiladon” 
drives), 86, 183-8, 189-95, 

465-6; first, second, 183, 282; 
third, 184; fourth, 185-6; 
fifth, 186-8, 190-5, 282, 330, 
332-4, 419, 420; sixth, prep- 
arations for, 86, 434-5, 441; 
launching of, 438-42; cancel- 
lation of, 472, 475 
August Uprising. See Nanchang 
Uprising 

Autumn Crop Uprising, 167-9 

Band, Professor William, 505 
Bandit suppression, 13, 18, 441-2, 
472 

Bandits, terminology^, 40, 41 
Banks, Soviet, and paper money, 
245-6 

Battle for Asia, The, 502 note 
Battle Hymn of China, soy note 
Bluechcr, General, 103 
Blueshirts (Lan / She), iS, 40S, 
440, 450, 47S; “black list” of 
Communists, 442 



INDEX 


Borodin, A'lichael, 164-5 
Bosshard, Rev., 62 
British, 87, 105,- 106, 494, 499; 
bombardment of Changsha, 
286, 484 note; alliance sought, 
403; police in Shanghai, 8; 
Labour Party, 76 
Burma, 509 

Canton, coup d’etat, 412; Com- 
munist seizure of, 443 
Canton Commune, 54, 171-2, 387 
Canton Uprising, 171-2 
Capital, 5, 296 

Casualties, Red Army, 193-5, 282 
Chahar, 22, 468 

Ch’ang Cheng — Long Anarch, q.v. 
Qiang Ching-fu, Communist or- 
ganizer, 223-4 

Chang Ching-yao, 153, 294 
Chang Chung, General, 474 
Chang Fa-kuei, General, 103; 
Commanding 4th Kuomin- 
tang Army, 329-30 
Chang Hao, 147 

Chang Hsueh-liang, A^arshal, 13, 
16, 43, 99, 300, 301, 315, 501; 
alliance with bandits, 18; -ca- 
reer, 19-22; European jour- 
ney, 20-1; and Cliiang Kai- 
shek, 22, 431; and Commu- 
nists, 22-4, 300-1, 433-4; ex- 
pedition against hillmen of 
Shensi, 222; withdrawal of 
troops, 427; in Sian incident, 
431; interview with Nym 
Wales, 433-4; and Hsipei 
Army, 445 

Chang Kuo-t’ao, 150, 157, 171, 
212, 213, 330, 423; chairman 
of Oyiiwan Soviet, 330 
Chang Nai-ch’i, 88 
Chang Sheng-fu, Professor, 158 
Chang Ting-chen, 172 
Chang Tso-lin, 130 
Changchow, captured, 185 
Changsha, i 34 - 5 » I 37 i i 44 - 5 i 


166, 170, 178-81, 252, 294; oc- 
cupied by Red Army, 179, 
286 

Chao Heng-t’i, Tuchun, 154-5, 
158-60 

Chao Ta-feng, 137 
Chao Tse-yen, labour leader, 53 
Chekiang, Soviets in, 73 
Chen Chang, poet, 15 1 
Chen Ch’eng, General, 99, 186 
Ch’en Chi-t’ang, warlord, 185, 
197; tungsten monopoly, 266 
Ch’en Keng, Commander, 213, 
423 

Chen Kung-po, 150, 157 
Ch’en Aling-shu, 184 
Chen Tso-hsing, 137 
Ch’en Tu-hsiu, 147, 153, 157, 161- 
3, 164-6, 247; dispute with 
Alao Tse-tung, 162-3; 
founder of Communist Party, 
54, 153-4 and note; promoter 
of pai-hua, 153 note; Socialist 
writer, 296 
Chen Wang-tao, 155 
Ch’en Yen-nien, 54 
Ch’eng Ch’ien, 248, 294 
Cheng Hao, 169 
Cheng Shan-jui, Commander, 223 
Cheng Wei-shan, Chairman of 
Shensi Soviet, 223 
Chengchow, 13 

Chiang Hsiao-hsien, General, 440 
Chiang Kai-shek, Generalissimo, 
13-16, 160, 184, 191-2, 410, 

415-16, 417-19, 429, 483, 488, 

498-9, 502, 508, 509, 511, ,512, 
513; leader of coup /detat 
(1927), 4, 52; 1st Annihila- 
tion Campaign, 286; tension 
with Tungpei, 431; Chairman 
of Executive Yuan, 431; 
“black list” of Communists, 
442; attitude toward Com- 
munists, 433-5, 439-41; ne- 
gotiations with Communists, 
454-63, 476-7; release of, 463; 


INDEX 


and Blueshirrs, 440, 450; 
coups d'etat at Nanking and 
Shanghai, 441-3; capture and 
captivity in Sian, 442-52, 453- 
_ 63, 4(54-'7>. 472-8, 501 
Qiiang Kai-shek, Mme. (Soong 
Mei-Iing), 14, 15, 199, 449 
note, 450-1, 452, 458-9, 465, 
467 

Ciiiang Kuang-nai, General, 184, 

315,457 

Chiang Ting-wen, General, 442, 

. 

Chiao Hui, battle of, 186 
Chien Ning, storming of, 185 
Chien Yi, 385 
Ch’in Shill Huang Ti, 29 
China at Bay, 380 note 
Qiina International Famine Relief 
Commission, 226-31 
Chhta Weekly Review, 416 note 
Chinese Revolution, 165, 467-70, 
478; first revolution, 136-9 
Ch’ing Pang, the Tammany of 
Shanghai, 19 
ChinghaC232, 339, 340 
Chingkanshan, 169-73, 387, 514 
Chou En-lai, Commander, 24, 47- 
55, 213, 224, 445, 457, 462, 
474, 477, 51 1; and Shanghai 
insurrection, 33-4; biography, 
51-5; European journey, 52; 
founder. Communist Party, 
52, 158; at the Tatu River, 
205; negotiations with Chiang 
Kai-shek, 456-62, 477 
Chou Fu-hai, 158 
Chou Hu-hai. 157 
Chou P’ing Fort, 199 
Chou-wu Hsiieh-hui (Awaken- 
ing Society), 147 note 
Ch’ii Ch’iu-pai, 15S, 166, 253 
Chu Hsun-pei, 15 1 
“Oiu-Alao,” 387-8 
Oiu Pci-tch, General, 177, 3S4-5 
Chu Siiao-liang, 184 
Chu Teh, Commander, 6, 49, 54, 


517 

61, 158, 166, 170, 172-3, 177, 
179, 185, 212-13, 370, 379-95, 
423, 476, 499; at the Tatu 
River, 205; career, 379-91; 
Commander-in-Ch'ef of Red 
Army, 185; with Second and 
Founh Front Armies, 285 
Chu Tso-chih, Communist engi- 
neer, 275-6 
Chu Yi, 177 

Chungking government, 508, 51 1, 
512 

Chung Lai Mountains, 210 
Chung Shan University, 273 
Churchill, Winston, 5 1 2 
Ciano, Count, 438 
Class Strtiggle, 155 
College for Women (Yenan), 505 
Comintern, 156, 165, 167, 404-5, 
410, 411-15, 417; and Chinese 
Communism, 410-16; assist- 
ance to Chinese Reds, 414-16, 
417, 421; 6th Congress, 414; 
7th Congress, 422 
Communism, Chinese. See Com- 
munist Pany of China 
Communist International. See 
Comintern 

Cotmnunist International Pro- 
grannne, 484 

Cotmnunist Manifesto, The, 155 
Communist Party of China, and 
Chinese Communism, 3, 16- 
17, 50-5, 59, 75, 80-6, 115-19, 
J49, 156-63, 164-75. 176, 179- 
83, 587, 234-43, 246-7, 252-3, 
271-2, 27S-9, 295-6, 550-1, 383, 
404-10, 455-16, 423-6, 445, 
454, 461-3, 498, 502, 311, 5'2; 
basic policies, 80-1; and Dr. 
Sun Yat-sen, 81; break with 
Kuomintang, 82, 163; condi- 
tions of peace with Kuomin- 
tang, 96-7. 423-6, 464-71; 

foundation, 156-7; Shanghai 
and Hunan, 156-7; of Hupeh, 
Shansi, Peiping, Canton, 


INDEX 


France, Germany, Moscow, 
157-8; 2nd, 3rd Congresses, 
159; entente with Kuomin- 
tang, 4, 81, 159; 5th Confer- 
ence, 162; central committee, 
159-63, 164-71, 213, 223, 466; 
6th Conference, 17 1; maxi- 
mum programme, 233; 
Young Vanguards and Chil- 
dren’s Brigades, 235; women’s 
organizations, 235; co-ordina- 
tion with Soviets and Red 
Army, 236; use of Latinized 
Chinese, 256-7; policy in Sian 
incident, 454-7, 460-3; rela- 
tions with Comintern, 410- 
15, 416-22; policy towards 
Japan, 86-90; united front, 
offer of, 92-8, 423-6; policy 
towards Moslems, 347-8, 349- 
55; peace proposals to Kuo- 
mintang, 454-8 

Communist Party, Russian, 409- 
10 

Communist Situation in China, 
183 note 

Communist Youth, 116-19, ^35; 
League of, 256, 272, 279, 364 

Communists, Chinese, belief in 
Russia, 405-10. See Commu- 
nist Party of China 

Co7npa?iy Discussion Materials, 
347 note 

Cotton, in Soviet Districts, 236, 
269 

Democracy, 82 

Democracy in China, 97, 486-90 

Diary of Chiang Kai-shek, 434, 
452 

Donald, W. H., 458-9, 462 

Dutch, 499 

Dutch East Indies, 93 

Eastoew Academy, Hunan, 313 

Education, Soviet System, 253-7 


Edwards, of Famine Relief Com- 
mission, 226 

Elder Brother Society, The (Ke 
Lao Hui), 58, 235 
“Extermination (of Reds), 
Drives.” See Anti-Red Cam- 
paigns 

Famine, 29, 83, 129, 225-30, 293 
Fan Shih-sheng, 385 
Fang Chih-min, Commander, 161, 
171 

Fang Wen-ping, 364 
Farmers, relief from taxation, 238 
Feng Yii-hsiang, ‘General, 99, 104, 
113, 152, 182, 231 note, 280, 
315, 342, 453 
Fleming, Peter, 72 note 
Flight of the Big Horse, 342 note 
France, 87 

Fu, Dr. Nelson, Medical Corps, 
396 

Fu Chin-kuei, 259-61, 264, 270, 
398 

Fu Hsieh, 147 
Fu Ssu-nien, 150 
Fu Tien Incident, 182 
Fukien, 417-18, 513; Soviets in, 73, 
162, 172, 174, 219; rebellion, 
186 

Fundamental Laws of the Chinese 
Soviet Republic, 73 note, 233, 
481 

Germany, 88, 105; and Japan, 
anti-Communist agreement, 
438 , 

Givens, C. Patrick, 8, 91 
Gold, resources in North-west, 
232 

Gold Sand River, 202, 218 
Gorky School, 114 
Great Britain. See British 
Great Grasslands, Reds march 
across, 209-18 

Hailofeng Soviet, 172 
Hall, G. Martel, 506 



INDEX 


Han (Chinese), 137, 341 note, 
352; dynast)% ancient capital 
of, 26 

Han Fu-chu, General, 99, 451 
Hankow (Wuhan), 49, 54, 135- 
7, j6i-3, 165, 167, i8o-i, 504; 
split in Kuomintang-Commu- 
nist alliance, 4, 82, 220 
Hankow-Canton Railway, 513 
Hanyang miners, 167; iron works 
at, 271 

Han Ying, General, 502, 509 
Hedin, Sven, on Flight of the 
Torgut, 216 

Hirota’s “Three Points,” 7, 477 
History of SociaUsvi, 155 
History of the Russian Revolu- 
tion, 482 note 

Ho Chien, General, 59, 146, 180, 
197, 286; as killer, do; peasant 
massacre, Hunan, 286 
Ho Chu-kuo, General, 359 
Ho Hsi-yang, Director of Red 
Arsenal, 271 

Ho Hsien-hon, Judge, 146 
Ho Lung, Commander, 58-62, 
103, i 66 , 171, 210, 213; arrest 
of Bosshard, 62; career, 58- 
62; defeat of, 385; pure pro- 
letarian, 326 

Ho Tzc-nien (Mme. Mao Tse- 
tung), 72 

Holienwan, 366, 393, 397 
Honan, Soviets in, 73, 191, 212, 
222, 330, 331-8. 504; loess- 
lands, 13 

Honan-Anhui-Hupeh Soviet, 219, 
330 

Hopei, 45J, S04, 505, 507; East, 
puppet regime of, 22, 86, 46S; 
Chaliar Council, 105, 468 
Ho Ying^chin, General, 183, 184, 
450-2, 458-9 
Hsia Hsi, 146 

Hsiang Kiang Erh Pao, 138 
Hsiang Cljiang Reviexv, 153 


519 

Hsiang T’an, birthplace of P’eng 
Tch-huai, 290-1 
Hsiao Chen, 147 
Hsiao Chu-chang, writer, 146 
Hsiao Hua, 475 

Hsiao K’ch, Commander, 210, 413 
Hsiao Shih'ping, 17 1 
Hsiao Yti, t44 
Hsieh Chuch-tsai, 25J 
Hsienyang, 429 
Hsifan (Tibetans), 213 
Hsiking Mhi Pao, 437 note 
Hsin Alin Qbung Pao, 133 
Hsin Min Hsiieh Hui (New 
People’s Study Society), 145, 
149, 153-3 

Hsing Kuo, 366; model Soviet, 
254; literacy of, 190; model 
bsic?!, I go 

Hsipei Chun ('North-western 
Army), 440-1, 443, 47i;. al- 
liance with Tungpei and Red 
armies, 440 
Hsu Clan, the, 332 
Hsu Hai-tung, Commander, 17 j, 
219. 222-3, 323-31, 332-3, 349, 
561, 372, 402, 429; with 15th 
Red Army Corps, 223 
Hsu Hsiang-ch’ien, Commander, 
171, 212-13, 219, 330, 423; 
with Fourth Front Army, 197 
Hsu Ko-hsiang Uprising, 163 
Hsu Pei-hao, 157 
Hsu Teh-lih, Commissar, 68, 137, 
149; on education in North- 
west, 242; career, 251-7; at 
University of Paris, 252 
Hu Chi-lung,’ 386 
Hu Han-min, 159, 453 
Hu Pei-reh, 172 
Hu Shih, Dr., 7, 147, 154 
Hu Tsung-nan, General, 99; dis- 
aster to First Army, 458-9 
Hu, Tuchiin, overthrow of, 294 
Huang Ai. 158 
Huang Kuo-nu, 173 
Huangpi, 329-30 



72 nDEX 


520 

Hunan, 3, 73, 167, 169, 179-82, 
210; Soviets in, 181-2, 188, 
196-7, 247, 252, 286; famine 
in, 129, 293; childhood of 
A'lao Tse-tung in, 123-34-, 
revolution in, 138-9; students 
in Peiping, 149; normal 
school, 142; independence 
movement, 153; Communist 
Patty, 157; labour syndicates, 
158; peasant movement, 161- 

3, 167; first Soviet in, 169; 
influence of Red Army, 179; 
birthplace of P’eng Teh- 
huai, 286 

Hupeh, Soviets in, 73, 191, 212, 
219, 323, 330-1, 504 . 

Illegitimacy, 242 
Imperialism, 86-90, 91-2 
Imperialism in China, 66, 81-90, 
479-91 
India, 77 
Indo-China, 93 • 

Ingram, Dr., of Famine Relief 
Commission, 226 
Imier History of the Chinese 
Revolution, 165 note 
Inprecorr, 422, 479 
Italy, 88, 105, 438 

Japan and Japanese, 7, 17, 20, 22- 

4, 41, 51, 85-90, 91-101, 105, 
iio-ii, 133, 217, 316, 346, 350, 
373, 417, 423-d, 431-8, 439-41, 
446-9, 467, 476-7, 487, 490-4; 
and Germany, anti-Red pact 
with, 438; Mao Tse-tung, on 
war with, 91-101; Communist 
declaration of war on, 187; 
Communist policies towards, 
86-90, 264; and policy of 
Reds at Sian, 455-63; and 
Italy, 438; Japanese imperial- 
ism in China, 10, 85, 86-90, 
289, 485, 490-4; bombardment 
of Changsha, 286, 484 note; 


invasion begun, 432; Press in 
China, 449 
Jehol, 20, 504 

Jehol, City of Emperors, 216 
Juichin, Second All-China Soviet- 
Congress, 187; Red Arsenal, 
191; Red military conference, 

193 

Kai Feng, 401 
Kamenev, 412-13 
Kanchow, attack on, 185 
Kang P’ei-ch’en, 150 
K’ang Yu-wei, 133, 135, 144 note, 
147 

Kansu, 102, 215, 219, 222, 228-31, 
277, 320, 341-8, 358, 370; 
taxes, 230-1; loesslands, 30; 
Revolutionary Military Com- 
mittee, 223; resources, 230-2. 
See Soviets, North-west, 
Communist Party 
Kao Chung-yu, 157 
Kao Kuei-tzu, General, 311, 319, 
397 

Kao Yu-han, 158 

Ke Lao Hui, 58-9, 130, 137, 221, 
_ 377 ' 

Kiang K’ang-hu, 138 
Kiangsi, 54, 64, 73, 170, 219, 254, 
329-30, 385, 512, 513; Soviets 
in, 57, 64, 170-5, 179, 191-2, 
245, 248, 254, 265-6, 282, 387, 
417, 419-21, 504; battle of, 
185; et'acuation of, by Red 
Army, 191-5, 197 
Korea, 96 
Kuangtung, 266 
Kung, H. H., Dr., 451, 459 
Kungch’antung. See Communist 
Party 

Kuo-Liang, labour leader, 146 
Kuominchun (“People’s Army”), 
220, 280 

Kuomintang, 4, 8, 19, 49, 52, 58- 
9, 96-7, 159-61, 167, 175, 177- 
9, 224, 246, 249, 252, 286, 309, 



IKDEX 


329-30, 384-5, 41 1, 480-1, 486- 
91, 49S-9, 501-12; entente 

with Communists, 159; and 
North-west famine, 227; and 
Communist alliance, 411-13; 
central executive committee, 
third plenary session of, 467- 
70; at 'l^^'uhan, 162, i 6 s\ en- 
tente with Communist Party, 
4, 81, 159; split with Com- 
munists, 4, 82, 220; reconciled 
to Nanking conp d’etat, 82; 
Communists expelled, 82; 
anti-Red campaigns, 183-8, 
191-5; currency, 245-7; block- 
ade, 1933, 2(56-8; arms cap- 
tured bjf Reds, 283-4; burn- 
ings in Hunan, 304; and Jap- 
anese invasion, 315; 4th 
Army, 329; and class war, 
331-9; and Moslems, 342-7, 
351; and united front, 423-6, 
455, 461-3, 467-71; present 
leadership, 487 

Ku Shun-chang, labour leader, 
53 

Ku Ta-chen, 172 
Kwangsi, 196-7, 451, 488, 513 
Kwangtung, 170, 198, 513 
Ksveichow, 187, 197-9, 488; fam- 
ine in, 83 

Lanchow, 267, 446 
Land, problem of, 84, 161-2, 174, 
193, 211, 238-40; ownership 
in China, 84-5 

Landlord and Peasant in China, 
84 note 

Landlords, 31, 39, 81, 161, 167, 
193, 217, 229-30, 238-41, 249, 
293, 328, 334, 552, 365, 480 
Lao Chiin Shan, 335 
J.atin-hna (Latinized Cliincse), 

257 

League of Nations, adviser sent 
to Nanking Government. 


521 

228; on Red collective enter- 
prise, 266 
“Left-Wing” Cotimninistii: An 
Infantile Disorder, 479 note 
Leith-Ross, Sir Frederick, 84, 105 
Lenin, 5, 308, 404-5, 475-6, 478-9, 
494 

Lenin Club (Lieh-ning T’ang), 
256, 269, 289, 308-1 1_, 314, 327 
Li Chai-sum, General, kidnapped, 
453 

Li Chiang-lin, 56-63, 359, 390 
Li Chou K’ou, 371 
Li Chuan, storming of, 185 
Li Fu-chen, 393 
Li Han-tsen, 157 
Li Ko-nung, 48, 368, 401, 427 
Li Li-san, 145, 158, 178; Mao’s 
critic, 180-3 

Li Lung-kuei, Commander, 223 
“Li Pai T’ang,’’ 395 
Li Sao-chu, 172 
Li Shih-ts’un, 149 
Li Su-chu, 177 
Li Sun, 157 
Li Ta, 157 
Li Ta-chao, 150, 157 
Li T’ai-po, poet, 143 note 
Li Teh, 360, 400-1, 403, 417-21 
Li Tsung-jen, General, 99, 432 
Li Tsung-yi, 337 
Li Wang Pao, 372, 374 
Li Wen-ling, 177 
Li Wen-lung, 172 
Li Yuan-bung, Tuchun, 136 
Liang Ch’i-ch’ao, 133, 135, 143, 
147, 295 

Liang Kuan-yin, 336 
Lin Pai-chu, Commissar, 109, 
157, 160; work as Commissar* 
of Finance. 247-51; budget 
apologist, 284 

Lin Piao, 6, 75, 79, 103-4, 147, 176, 
205, 213, 224, 385, 4:9 
Lindsay. A. D.. 506 
Lindsay. Professor Michael, 305- 
6. 507 



INDEX 


524 

6; See Moslems, Ma Hung- 
ku’ei, Soviets 

Ninghsia Kung Pao, 345 note 
Ningtu Uprising, 185 
North China Front, 500 note 
Northern Expedition, i6i 
North-west China, 7, ii, 22, 69, 
431-63; strategic importance 
of, 217; famine in, 2*5-7; 
taxes, -230; Soviets in, 232- 
57; “industrial boom,” 276; 
budget of, 284; and Moslems, 
343-4; Rebellion, 1928, 342. 
See Soviets 

North-westem Provinces and 
their Possibilities of Develop- 
ment, 228 
Noulens, 415 

Oil wells, Soviet, 269 
Opium, in Shensi, 29; in Kansu, 
230-1 note; eradication by- 
Soviets, 190, 241; smoking 
prohibited in Red Army, 3 1 1 
Order of Instruction, 236 note 
Ou-Mei P’ai (European-Ameri- 
can clique), 466 

Outline for Budget Compilation, 
250 / 

Outline for Co-operative Devel- 
opnent, 244 note 
Oyiiwan, Soviets in, 171, 191, 

331-9 

Pai Chia P’ing, 45, 47 
Pai Chung-hsi, General, 54, 99, 
197. 43Z 

P’ang, rebel leader, 130 
Pang Yuan-ch’ing, 158 
Pao An, 50, 69, 74, 220, 224, 399- 
403, 422, 427, 445 
Pao-chia system, 41 
Pao Hui-sheng, 157 
Pao Tou Shui, 370 
Paoting Militar}>- Academy, 280 
Paris, Chinese students in, 384 
Partisans, training, 45; in Kiangsi, 


172; tactics in warfare, 176- 
8, ' 210, 298-305; Partisan 

(Roving) Brigades, 235 
Party Work, 310 
Peasant Monthly, 161 
Peasants, and Reds, 67-8, 210-12, 
259-65; character of, 228; 
* unions, 160-63, 167; move- 
ments, 159-63; of loesslands, 
30; under pao-chia, 41; vot- 
ing rights, 234-5; organiza- 
tions, 161-3; and workers’ 
army, 167-8; revolutionary 
committee, 179; start on 
Long March, 194; result of 
contact with Red Army on 
Long March, 217-18; upris- 
ing, 1929, 220; armed in 
Shensi, 223; Peasant Column 
Army, 387; government, 234; 
conversations with, 259-65. 
See Soviets 

Peasant Guards, 235; support for 
Soviets, 237-8; illiteracy in 
North-west, 254 

Peiping (Peking), 9-10, 149-55, 
505 

P’eng Kung-t’a, 166 
P’eng Pai, 157 

P’eng Teh-huai, Commander, 173, 
179, 182, 213, 224, 252, 281, 
286-305, 323, 369-72, 374-8, 
429, 446, 499; at the Tatu 
River, 205; career, 285-97; 
Commander-in-Chief, First 
Front Army, 277; on partisan 
tactics, 297-305; becomes a 
Marxist, 296; leader of P’in- 
kiang Uprising, 286; cap- 
tured Changsha, 286; talk on 
United Front, 372, 375-8 
People’s Congress, 468, 477 
Philippines, 87, 93 
Pien, Commandant, 45-6 
Ping chien (military persuasion), 
453 

P’in-kiang Insurrection, 286 



INDEX 


526 

Shanghai, 49, 5o, 151-3, i59, 382; 
workers in, 274, 483; insur- 
rection, 53-4; massacre, 54, 
163; founding of Communist 
Party, 157; headquarters of 
Communist Party, 18 1 
Shangheng, Soviet established, 
173 

Shansi, 10, 25, 44, 50, 504, _ 505, 
507; Revolutionary Military 
Committee, 223 
Shansi Wa-wa, the, 366 
Shantung, 451, 504, 312 
Shao Li-tzu, Governor, 13, 440-1; 
founder of Communist 
Party, 16; his wife, 17 
Shao-nien Hsien-feng-tid. See 
Young Vanguard 
Shao P’iao-p’ing, 150 
Shensi, ii, 102, 188, 219, 230-r, 
253, 277, sio; farmland, 63- 
4; dialect of hill people, 
35; Communist Party School, 
214; famine, 228-30; opium 
in, 29; loesslands, 13, 30; 
taxes, 229-30; resources, 231; 
Soviets in, 213, 219-23, 304; 
peasant rising and formation 
of guerrilla bands, 220; Rev- 
olutionary Military Commit- 
tee, 223; opium eliminated, 
241; cotton growing started, 
269; officer training schools, 
301; pacification of, 440-1. 
See Soviets, North-west, Red 
Army, Communist Party 
Shensi-Kansu-Ninghsia Border 
Area Government, 304 
Shih Ta-k’ai, Prince, 201 
Shill Tseng-tung, 137 
Siam, 87, 93 

Sian, II, 13-19, 23, 28-9, 267, 429; 

incident of, 431-71, 497-8, 301 
Sian, A Coup d’ktat, 432 
Sinkiang (Chinese Turkestan), 
284, 342, 347, 334, 472; 

sources, 232 


Smedley, Agnes, 307 note 
Soong Mei-ling. See Mme. 

Chiang Kai-shek 
Soong, T._V., 431, 439, 462 
Soviet Union, 95-6, 284, 482, 484, 
494, 309, 311-12; influence in 
China, 404-10; alliance with 
China, 411; alliance sought, 
435, 463; pact with Outer 
Adongolia, 472-3; and Sin- 
kiang, 472-3 

Soviets, first established, 3, 169; 
territory, ii, 472-3; in Fu- 
kien, 64; Second All-China 
Congress, 73, 187; popula- 
tion, 73; policies, 86-7, 236- 
43; movement, 164-73; Oyii- 
wan district, 171, 19 1, 326, 
331-3; central Soviets, 172; 
Kiangsi provincial govern- 
ment, 173; Sungpan Region, 
210; in northern Hunan, 210; 
in Shensi, 213, 219-23; funda- 
mental laws, 233; economy, 
233, 238, 243, 249-31; classes 
in, 234; committees, 236; or- 
ganizations, 233; peasant sup- 
port, 237-9; redistribution of 
land, 161-2, 238-40, 301, 303; 
co-operatives, 190, 240, 244- 
3, 261, 266, 307; culture, 241- 
3; marriage, 242;'fundamental 
economic principles, 243-4; 
currency, 243-6; confiscation, 
249; educational system, 234- 
7, 301, 307; industry, 263-70; 
first congress, 184, 388; 

money, 243-6; Central gov- 
ernment, 183, 187, 236; 

women under, 236, 242, 272; 
workers, 189-90, 271-6; vot- 
ing rights, 233; North-west 
Government, 400 
Special Area Government, 467, 
475 

Ssu iMa-kuang, 293 
Ssu Yang, 137 



INDEX 527 


Stalin, and Stalinism, 404, 411-14, 
476, 480 

Stampar, A., 228-32 
Strikes, in Japanese mills, Shang- 
hai, 436; in Tsingtao, 436 
Stmggle, 310 

Suffrage, universal, 235, 501, 503, 

, 504, 507 
Sui dynasty, 340 

Suiyuan (Inner Mongolia), ii, 
435-7i 491; famine in, 225 
Sun Hsiao-ch’ing, 147 note 
Sun Ming-chiu, 443-4 
Sim, New York, 434 note 
Sun Yat-sen, Dr,, 81, 135, 247, 
294, 445i 47<5, 502. 51 1; 

founder of Kuomintang, 4 
note; founder of T’ung 
Meng Hui, 144 note; death, 
i( 5 o; promise to North-west, 
234 

Sun Yat-sen, Mmc., 510 
Sun Yuan-lu, 157 . 

Sung Cheh-yuan, General, op- 
posed to civil war, 451 
Sung T’ien-tsai, General, 336 
Sungpan, Soviets of, 210 
Swatow, 54 

Szechuan, 12, 201-2, 431, 513; 
famine in, 83; taxes, 83-4; 

-Soviets in, 197, 210; invaded 
by Reds, 204-15; indecision 
of Red Army in, 212 

Ta Hsi-Pei, i.e. N.W. China, q.v. 
Ta Lung P’ing, battle of, 186 
Tai Chi-t’ao, 160 
Tai Tsung-ling, 177 
T’aiping rebels, 201 
T’an Ning, storming of, 185 
T’an P’ing-shan, 150, 160 
T’an Yen-k’ai, 137, 141, 153 
T’ang dynast)% 69, 341 
T’ang En-p’o, General, 319, 332, 
33*5 

T’ang Hsiang-ming, 141 


T’ang Sheng-chih, General, 138, 
163 

Tangku Truce, 417 
Tangti Kmigtso (Party Work), 
247 _ 

Tam River, crossing of, 201-9 
Ta’un Pu, 29 
Teng Ch’ing-tan, 185 
Teng En-ming, 157 
Teng Fa, Commissar, 27-8, 58 
Teng P’ing, 173 
Teng Pi-vni, 157 
Teng Sung-hsia, 157 
Teng Tzu-hui, 172 
Third International, See Comin- 
tern 

Third Revolution, 54 
Tiao Pao Tzu, 372, 374-7 
Tibet, 198, 205, 213, 389 
Tien Tai Shan, Soviet, 335 
T’ien Teh-yuan, 173 
Ting Ling, authoress, 105 
Tito, Marshal, 312 
Todd, O. J., of Famine Relief 
Commission, 226 
Toil Tsiing, 268 note 
Tou Tsung-ping, 169 
Trotsky, 313, 482 note; and Chi- 
nese Revolution, 174, 313, 
411-14 

Tsai, Commissar, 400-1, 427 
Ts’ai Ao, 381 
Tsai Ho-sheng, 138 
Ts’ai T’ing-k’ai, General, 99, 184, 
186; hero of Shanghai war, 
315 

Ts’ai Yuan-p’ei, 144 
Tsalin, ist Chinese Soviet at, 3, 
169 

Tsao K’un, 433 
Tsao Pu-shen, 185 
Tseng Kuo-fan, 20 r 
Tso Chuan, Commander, 213 
Tso Tsung-t'ang, General, 341 
Tsu Yun Chai, massacre, 336 
Tsun-yi, 187, 198, 3 >9 
Tu Yuch-sheng, 19 



28 INDEX 


Tuan Hsi'p’en, 150 

T’ung Meng Hui, 135, 144, 247 

Tungkuan, 435 

Tungpel (North-eastern) Army, 
20-5, 423, 427; and Sian inci- 
dent, 431-42; united front 
agreement with Communists, 
24; defeated by 15th Red 
Army Corps, 223; eight- 
point programme, 445, 462; 
anti-Japanese sentiments of, 
433 

Turkestan, Chinese. See Sinkiang 
Tzu-tan hsien, 225 

Uniform Factory, 272 
United Anti-Japanese Military 
Council, 446 

United Front, Policy of Commu- 
nist Party, 7, 70, 86, 92, 108, 
187, 268, 353, 370-9, 407, 422, 
438-9, 455-d, 475, 492; ac- 
cepted by Tungpei Army, 
24; rejected by Chiang Kai- 
shek, 435; Mao Tse-tung ex- 
plains, 94-7, 423-6; effect of, 
on Japanese aggression, 491- 
3; in France, 397 

Voleii, 161 

Von Seeclct, adviser to Chiang 
Kai-shek, 6, 416 

Wa Ya Pao, 31, 224, 319 
Wales, Miss Nym, 433-4 
M^all newspaper contents, 310 
“Wang,” Pastor, 18-19, 23-6 
Wang Chia-lieh, Governor, 198 
Wang Chin-mei, 157 
Wang Ching-wei, 59, 160, 165, 
435, 449-50, 468, 499 
Wang Ch’u Ts’un, Military 
School, 24 

Wang Chiin, General, 336 
Wang Chung-hui, 466 
Wang Erh-tso, 385 
Wang Hsing, 135 


Wang Kuan-lan, Land Commis- 
sioner, 239 
Wang Kung-lu, 177 
Wang Ming, 421 
Wang Tso, bandit leader, 170 
Wang Yi-che, General, 223 
Wasteland, reclamation of, 238 
Wei Kung-chih, Miss, 113 
Wei Pei irrigation project, 230 
Wei River, 446, 472 
Wen Ch’i-mei, 123 
Wen-hua Shu Hui, 153 
Whampoa Academy, 103, 219; 

Red commanders from, 280 
Whampoa students, 52, 54, 15^- 
60, 385 

AVittfogel, Dr. K. A., 84 
Women, and agriculture, 236; 
under Soviets, 235-6, 256, 
272-3 

Workers, massacre of, 163. See 
Soviets, Shanghai 
Wu, Commissar, 400 
Wu Ch’i Chen, 265, 269-73 
Wu Chung-hao, 177 
Wuhan. See Hankow 
Wuhan Uprising, 136 
Wu Liang-p’ing, 91, 277 
Wu Tze-hui, 384 

Yang Chen-ch’i, 143, 150 
Yang Chien. The Covnimnist Sit- 
uation in China, 183 note 
Yang Hsi-ming, 160 
Yang Hu-cheng, 13-15, 446, 462, 
471; his wives, 14-15; defeat 
of Liu Tzu-tan, 222; Pacifica- 
tion Commissioner of Shensi, 
440 

Yang K’ai-hui (Afme. Mao Tse- 
tung), 151, 156 
Yang Lo-sou, 169 
Yang Shan-kun, Comritissar, 278- 
9, 427' 

Yangtze River, 499, 509; problem 
of crossing, 197-200 
Yao, a guide, 43-5 



529 


IXDEX 


Yeh Chien-ying, 445; delegate to 
Sian, 46a 
Yeh Li-Yiin, 146 
Yeh T’ing, 103, 502, 509; leader 
of Nanchang Uprising, 166 
Yen Ch’ang, Soviets formed, 319 
Yen Ch’ih, salt deposits, 268 
Yen Hsi-shan, anti-Communist, 
394 

Yenan (Fushih), besieged by 
Reds, 24, 32-3, 504-s; Red 
capital, 69 note, 474-5, 510, 

511 

Yenching University, 505, 506 
Yi Pei-chi, 144 
York, 161 

Young Vanguards, 47-8, 235, 289, 
362-9, 372, 374, 395, 506 
Yu-chi-tzd, “Red partisans,” 41 
Yu Hsueh-chung, 446 
Yii Sha-t’ou, 168 


Yuwang Hsicn, 324-6 
Yu Wang Pao, 277, 362, 370-2; 
headquarters of First Front 
Army, 285, 297 
Yii Yu-jen, 133 

Yuan Shih-k’ai, 139, 141, 381, 437 
Yuan Wen-tsai, bandit leader, 
170, 387 

Yugoslavia, 512 
Yung Ch’ang, 223 
Yung P'ing (Shensi), coal mines, 
268; oil, 269 

Yungting, Soviet established, 173 
Yunnan, i88, 198-9, 385, 451,- 48S, 
513 

Yiitu, Red Army concentration 
at, 194 

ZiNonEv, and Chinese Revolu- 
tion, 412-13 



